1. THE NATURE OF THE TAO
The Tao-Path is not the All-Tao.
The Name is not the Thing named.

Unmanifested, it is the Secret Father of Heaven and Earth manifested, 
it is their Mother.

To understand this Mystery, one must be fulfilling one's will,
and if one is not thus free, one will but gain a smattering of it.

The Tao is one, and the Teh but a phase thereof. The abyss of this
Mystery is the Portal of Serpent-Wonder.

2. THE ENERGY - SOURCE OF THE SELF
All men know that beauty and ugliness are correlatives, as are skill and
clumsiness; one implies and suggests the other.

So also existence and non-existence pose the one the other;
so also is it with ease and difficulty, length and shortness; height and
lowness. Also Musick exists through harmony of opposites;
time and space depend upon contraposition.

By the use of this method, the sage can fulfil his will without action,
and utter his word without speech.

All things arise without diffidence; they grow, and none interferes; they
change according to their natural order, without lust of result. The
work is accomplished; yet continueth in its orbit, without goal. This
work is done unconsciously; this is why its energy is indefatigable.

3. QUIETING FOLK
To reward merit is to stir up emulation; to prize rarities is to
encourage robbery; to display desirable things is to excite the disorder
of covetousness.

Therefore, the sage governeth men by keeping their minds and their bodies
at rest, contenting the one by emptiness, the other by fullness. He
satisfieth their desires, thus fulfilling their wills, and making them
frictionless; and he maketh them strong in body, to a similar end.

He delivereth them from the restlessness of knowledge and the cravings of
discontent. As to those who have knowledge already, he teacheth them the
way of non-action. This being assured, there is no disorder in the
world.

4. THE SPRING WITHOUT SOURCE
The Tao resembleth the emptiness of Space; to employ it, we must avoid
creating ganglia. Oh Tao, how vast art Thou, the Abyss of Abysses, thou
Holy and Secret Father of all Fatherhoods of Things!

Let us make our sharpness blunt; let us loosen our complexes; let us
tone down our brightness to the general obscurity. Oh Tao, how still art
thou, how pure, continuous One beyond Heaven!

This Tao hath no Father; it is beyond all other conceptions, higher than
the highest.

5. THE FORMULA OF THE VACUUM
Heaven and earth proceed without motive, but casually in their order of
nature, dealing with all things carelessly, like used talismans. So also
the sages deal with their people, not exercising benevolence, but
allowing the nature of all to move without friction.

The Space between heaven and earth is their breathing apparatus:
Exhalation is not exhaustion, but the complement of Inhalation, and this
equally of that. Speech exhausteth; guard thyself, therefore, maintaining
the perfect freedom of thy nature.

6. THE PERFECTING OF FORM
The Teh is the immortal enemy of the Tao, its feminine aspect. Heaven
and Earth issued from her Gate; this Gate is the Root of their World-
Sycamore. Its operation is of pure Joy and Love, and faileth never.

7. THE CONCEALMENT OF THE LIGHT
Heaven and Earth are mighty in continuance, because their work is
delivered from the lust of result.

Thus also the sage, seeking not any goal, attaineth all things; he doth
not interfere in the affairs of his body, and so that body acteth without
friction. It is because he meddleth not with personal aims that these
come to pass with simplicity.

8. THE NATURE OF PEACE
Admire thou the High Way of Water! Is not Water the soul of the life of
things, whereby they change? Yet it seeketh its level, and abideth
content in obscurity. So also it resembleth the Tao, in this Way
thereof!

The virtue of a house is to be well-placed; of the mind, to be at ease in
silence as of Space; of societies, to be well-disposed; of governments,
to maintain quietude; of work, to be skillfully performed; and of all
motion, to be made at the right time.

Also it is the virtue of a man to abide in his place without discontent;
thus offendeth he no man.

9. THE WAY OF RETICENCE
Fill not a vessel, lest it spill in carrying. Meddle not with a
sharpened point by feeling it constantly, or it will soon become
blunted.

Gold and jade endanger the house of their possessor. Wealth and honors
lead to arrogance and envy, and bring ruin. Is thy way famous and thy
name becoming distinguished? Withdraw, thy work once done, into
obscurity; this is the way of Heaven.

10. THINGS ATTAINABLE
When soul and body are in the bond of love, they can be kept together.
By concentration on the breath it is brought to perfect elasticity, and one
becomes as a babe. By purifying oneself from Samadhi one becomes whole

In his dealing with individuals and with society, let him move without
lust of result. In the management of his breath, let him be like the
mother-bird. Let his intelligence comprehend every quarter; but let his
knowledge cease.

Here is the Mystery of Virtue. It createth all and nourisheth all; yet
it doth not adhere to them; it operateth all, but knoweth not of it, nor
proclaimeth it; it directeth all, but without conscious control.

11. THE VALUE OF THE UNEXPRESSED
The thirty spokes join in their nave, that is one; yet the wheel
dependeth for use upon the hollow place for the axle. Clay is shapen to
make vessels; but the contained space is what is useful. Matter is
therefore of use only to mark the limits of the space which is the thing
of real value.

12. THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EXTERNAL
The five colors film over Sight; The five sounds make Hearing dull; The
five flavours conceal Taste; occupation with motion and action bedevil
Mind; even so the esteem of rare things begetteth covetousness and
disorder.

The wise man seeketh therefore to content the actual needs of the
people; not to excite them by the sight of luxuries. He banneth these,
and concentrateth on those.

13. THE CONTEMPT FOR CIRCUMSTANCE
Favor and disgrace are equally to be shunned; honour and calamity to be
alike regarded as adhering to the personality.

What is this which is written concerning favour and disgrace? Disgrace
is the fall from favour. He then that hath favour hath fear, and its
loss begetteth fear yet greater of a further fall. What is this which is
written concerning honour and calamity? It is this attachment to the
body which maketh calamity possible; for were one bodiless, what evil
could befall him?

Therefore let him that regardeth himself rightly administer also a
kingdom; and let him govern it who loveth it as another man loveth
himself.

14. THE SHEWING-FORTH OF THE MYSTERY
We look at it, and see it not; though it is Omnipresent; and we name it
the Root-Balance. We listen for it, and hear it not, though it is
Omniscient; and we name it the Silence. We feel for it, and touch it not,
though it is Omnipotent; and we name it the Concealed. These three Virtues
hath it, yet we cannot describe it as consisting of them; but, mingling them
aright, we apprehend the One.

Above, it shineth not; below, it is not dark. It moveth all
continuously, without Expression, returning into Naught. It is the Form
of That which is beyond Form; it is the Image of the Invisible; it is
Change, and Without Limit.

We confront it, and see not its Face; we pursue it, and its Back is
hidden from us. Ah! but apply the Tao as in old Time to the work of the
present; know it as it was known in the Beginning; follow fervently the
Thread of the Tao.

15. THE APPEARANCE OF THE TRUE NATURE
The adepts of past ages were subtle and keen to apprehend this Mystery,
and their profundity was obscurity unto men. Since then they were not
known, let me declare their nature.

To all seeming, they were fearful as men that cross a torrent in winter
flood; they were hesitating like a man in apprehension of them that are
about him; they were full of awe like a guest in a great house; they were
ready to disappear like ice in thaw; they were unassuming like unworked
wood; they were empty as a valley; and dull as the waters of a marsh.

Who can clear muddy water? Stillness will accomplish this. Who can
obtain rest? Let motion continue equably, and it will itself be peace.

The adepts of the Tao, conserving its way, seek not to be actively self-
conscious. By their emptiness of Self they have no need to show
their youth and perfection; to appear old and imperfect is their
privilege.

16. THE WITHDRAWAL TO THE ROOT
Emptiness must be perfect, and Silence made absolute with tireless
strength. All things pass through the period of action; then they return
to repose. They grow, bud, blossom and fruit; then they return to the
root. This return to the root is this state which we name Silence; and
this Silence is Witness of their Fulfilment.

This cycle is the universal law. To know it is the part of intelligence;
to ignore it bringeth folly of action, whereof the end is madness. To know it
bringeth understanding and peace; and these lead to the identification of
the Self with the Not-Self. This identification maketh man a king; and
this kingliness groweth unto godhood. That godhood beareth fruit in the
mastery of the Tao. Then the man, the Tao permeating him, endureth; and
his bodily principles are in harmony, proof against decay, until the
hour of his Change.

17. THE PURITY OF THE CURRENT
In the Age of Gold, the people were not conscious of their rulers; in the
Age of Silver, they loved them, with songs; in the Age of Brass, they
feared them; in the Age of Iron, they despised them. As the rulers
lost confidence, so also did the people lose confidence in them.

How hesitating did they seem, the Lords of the Age of Gold, speaking with
deliberation, aware of the weight of their word! Thus they accomplished
all things with success; and the people deemed their well-being to be the
natural course of events.

18. THE DECAY OF MANNERS
When men abandoned the Way of the Tao, benevolence and justice became
necessary. Then also was need of wisdom and cunning, and all fell into
illusion. When harmony ceased to prevail in the six spheres it was needful
to govern them by manifesting Sons. When the kingdoms and races became
confused, loyal ministers had to appear.

19. RETURNING TO THE PURITY OF THE CURRENT
If we forgot our statesmanship and our wisdom, it would be an hundred
times better for the people. If we forgot our benevolence and our
justice, they would become again like sons, folk of good will. If we
forget our machines and our business, there would be no knavery.

These new methods despised the olden Way, inventing fine names to
disguise their baneness. But simplicity in the doing of the will of
every man would put an end to vain ambitions and desires.

20. THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE COMMON WAY
To forget learning is to end trouble. The smallest difference in words,
such as 'yes' and 'yea', can make endless controversy for the
scholar. Fearful indeed is death, since all men fear it; but the abyss of
questionings, shoreless and bottomless, is worse!

Consider the profane man, how he preeneth, as if at feast, or gazing upon
Spring from a tower! But as for me, I am as one who yawneth, without any
trace of desire. I am like a babe before its first smile. I appear sad
and forlorn, like a man homeless. The profane man hath his need filled,
ay, and more also. For me, I seem to have lost all I had. My mind is as
it were stupefied; it hath no definite shape. The profane man looketh
lively and keen-witted; I alone appear blank in my mind. They seem
eagerly critical; I appear careless and without perception. I seem to be
as one adrift upon the sea, with {24} no thought of an harbor. The
profane have each one his definite course of action; I alone appear
useless and uncomprehending, like a man from the border. Yea, thus I
differ from all other men: but my jewel is the All-Mother!

21. THE INFINITE WOMB
The sole source of energy is the Tao. Who may declare its nature? It is
beyond Sense, yet all form is hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet
all Perceptibles are hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet all
Perceptibles are hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet all Being is
hidden within it. This Being excites Perception, and the Word thereof.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, its Name
operateth continuously, causing all to flow in the cycle of Change, which
is Love and Beauty. How do I know this? By my comprehension of the Tao.

22. THE GUERDON OF MODESTY
The part becometh the whole. The curve becometh straight; the void
becometh full; the old becometh new. He who desireth little
accomplisheth his Will with ease; who desireth many things becometh
distracted.

Therefore, the sage concentrateth upon one Will, and it is as a light to
the whole world. Hiding himself, he shineth; withdrawing himself, he
attracteth notice; humbling himself, he is exalted; dissatisfied with
himself, he gaineth force to achieve his Will. Because he striveth not,
no man may contend against him.

That is no idle saw of the men of old; 'The part becometh the whole'; it
is the Canon of Perfection.

23. THE VOID OF NAUGHT
To keep silence is the mark of one who is acting in full accordance with
his Will. A fierce wind soon falleth; a storm-shower doth not last all
day. Yet Heaven and Earth cause these; and if they fail to make violence
continue, how much less can man abide in spasm of passion!

With him that devoteth him to Tao, the devotees of Tao are in accord; so
also are the devotees of Teh, yea, even they who fail in seeking those are in
accord.

So then his brothers in the Tao are joyful, attaining it; and his
brothers in the Teh are joyful, attaining it; and they who fail in
seeking these are joyful, partaking of it. But if he himself realize not
the Tao with calm of confidence, then they also appear lacking in
confidence.

24. EVIL MANNERS
He who standeth a-tiptoe standeth not firm; he who maketh rigid his legs
walketh ill. He who preeneth himself shineth not; he who talketh
positively is vulgar; he who boastheth is refused acceptance; he who is
wise in his own conceit is thought inferior. Such attitudes, to him that
hath the view given by understanding the Tao, seem like garbage or like
cancer, abhorrent to all. They then who follow the Way do not admit them.

25. IMAGES OF THE MYSTERY
Without Limit and Perfect, there is a Becoming, beyond Heaven and Earth.
It hath nor motion nor Form; it is alone, it changeth not; it extendeth
all ways; it hath no Adversary. It is like the All-Mother.

I know not its Name, but I call it the Tao. Moreover, I exert myself,
and call it Vastness.

Vastness, the Becoming! Becoming, it flieth afar. Afar, it draweth
near. Vast is this Tao; Heaven also is Vast; Earth is vast; and the Holy
King is vast also. In the Universe are Four Vastnesses, and of these is
the Holy King.

Man followeth the formula of Earth; Earth followeth that of Heaven, and
Heaven that of the Tao. The formula of the Tao is its own Nature.

26. THE NATURE OF MASS
Mass is the fulcrum of mobility; stillness is the father of motion.

Therefore the sage King, though he travel afar, remaineth near his
supplies. Though opportunity tempt him, he remaineth quietly in proper
disposition, indifferent. Should the master of an host of chariots bear
himself frivolously? If he attack without support, he loseth his base;
if he become a raider, he forfeiteth his throne.

27. SKILL IN THE METHOD
The experienced traveler concealeth his tracks; the clever speaker giveth
no chance to the critic; the skilled mathematician useth no abacus; the
ingenious safesmith baffleth the burglar without the use of bolts, and
the cunning binder without ropes and knots. So also the sage, skilled in
man-emancipation-craft, useth all men; understanding the value of everything,
he rejecteth nothing. This is called the Occult Regimen.

The adept is then master to the zelator, and the zelator assisteth and
honoreth the adept. Yet unless these relations were manifest, even the
most intelligent observer might be perplexed as to which was which. This
is called the Crown of Mystery.

28. THE RETURN TO SIMPLICITY
Balance thy male strength with thy female weakness and thou shalt attract
all things, as the ocean absorbeth all rivers; for thou shalt formulate
the excellence of the Child eternal, simple, and perfect. Knowing the light,
remain in the Dark. Manifest not thy Glory, but thine obscurity. Clothed in
this Child-excellence eternal, thou hast attained the Return of the First
State. Knowing splendour of Fame, cling to Obloquy and Infamy; then shalt
thou remain as in the Valley to which flow all waters, the lodestone to
fascinate all men. Yea, they shall hail in thee this Excellence, eternal,
simple and perfect, of the Child.

The raw material, wrought into form, produceth vessels. So the sage
King formulateth his Wholeness in divers Offices; and his Law is without
violence or constraint.

29. REFRAINING FROM ACTION
He that, desiring a kingdom, exerteth himself to obtain it, will fail. A
Kingdom is of the nature of spirit, and yieldeth not to activity. He who
graspeth it, destroyeth it; he who gaineth it, loseth it.

The wheel of nature revolveth constantly; the last becometh first, and
the first last; hot things grow cold, and cold things hot; weakness
overcometh strength; things gained are lost anon. Hence the wise man
avoideth effort, desire and sloth.

30. A WARNING AGAINST WAR
If a king summon to his aid a Master of the Tao, let Him not advise
recourse to arms. Such action certainly bringeth the corresponding
reaction.

Where armies are, are weeds. Bad harvests follow great hosts.

The good general striketh decisively, once and for all. He does not
risk by overboldness. He striketh, but doth not vaunt his victory. He
striketh according to strict law of necessity, not from desire of victory

Things become strong and ripe, then age. This is discord with the
Tao; and what is not at one with the Tao soon cometh to an end.

31. COMPOSING QUARREL
Arms, though they be beautiful, are of ill omen, abominable to all
created beings. They who have the Tao love not their use.

The place of honour is on the right in wartime; so thinketh the man of
distinction. Sharp weapons are ill-omened, unworthy of such a man; he
useth them only in necessity. He valueth peace and ease, desireth not
violence of victory. To desire victory is to desire the death of men;
and to desire that is to fail to propitiate the people.

At feasts, the left hand is the high seat; at funerals, the right. The
second in command of the army leadeth the left wing, the commander-in-
chief, the right wing; it is as if the battle were a rite of mourning!
He that hath slain most men should weep for them most bitterly; so then
the place of the victor is assigned to him with philosophical propriety.

32. THE WISDOM OF THE
The All-Tao hath no name.

It is That Minute Point yet the whole world dare not contend
against him that hath it. Did a lord or king gain it and guard it, all
men would obey him of their own accord.

Heaven and Earth combining under its spell, shed forth dew, extending
throughout all things of its own accord, without man's interference.

Tao, in its phase of action, hath a name. Then men can comprehend it;
when they do this, there is no more risk of wrong or ill-success.

As the great rivers and the oceans are to the valley streams, so is the
Tao to the whole universe.

33. THE DISCRIMINATION (VIVEKA) OF THE
He who understandeth others understandeth Two; but he who understandeth
himself understandeth One. He who conquereth others is strong; but he
who conquereth himself is stronger yet. Contentment is riches; and continuous
action is Will.

He that adapteth himself perfectly to his environment, continueth for
long; he who dieth without dying, liveth for ever.

34. THE METHOD OF ATTAINMENT
The Tao is immanent; it extendeth to the right hand as to the left.

All things derive from it their being; it createth them, and all comply
with it. Its work is done, and it proclaimeth it not. It is the
ornament of all things, yet it claimeth not fief of them; there is
nothing so small that it inhabiteth not, and informeth it.
All things return without knowledge of the Cause thereof; there is
nothing so great that it inhabiteth not, and informeth it.

In this manner also may the Sage perform his Works. It is by not
thrusting himself forward that he winneth to his success.

35. THE GOOD WILL OF THE TEH
The whole world is drawn to him that hath the likeness of the Tao.
Men flock unto him, and suffer no ill, but gain repose, find
peace, enjoy all ease.

Sweet sounds and cates lure the traveler from his way. But the Word of
the Tao; though it appear harsh and insipid, unworthy to hearken or to
behold; hath his use all inexhaustible.

36. THE HIDING OF THE LIGHT
In order to draw breath, first empty the lungs; to weaken another, first
strengthen him; to overthrow another, first exalt him; to despoil
another, first load him with gifts; this is called the Occult Regimen.

The soft conquereth the hard; the weak pulleth down the strong.

The fish that leaveth ocean is lost; the method of government must be
concealed from the people.

37. THE RIGHT USE OF GOVERNMENT
The Tao proceedeth by its own nature, doing nothing; therefore there is
no doing which it comprehendeth not.

If kings and princes were to govern in this manner, all things would
operate aright by their own motion.

If this transmutation were my object, I should call it Simplicity.
Simplicity hath no name nor purpose; silently and at ease all things go
well.

38. CONCERNING THE THE
Those who possessed perfectly the powers did not manifest them,
and so they preserved them. Those who possessed them imperfectly feared
to lose them, and so lost them.

The former did nothing, nor had need to do. The latter did, and had
need to do.

Those who possessed benevolence exercised it, and had need it; so also
was it with them who possessed justice.

Those who possessed the conventions displayed them; and when men would
not agree, they made ready to fight them.

Thus, when the Tao was lost, the Magick Powers appeared; then, by
successive degradations, came Benevolence, Justice, Convention.

Now convention is the shadow of loyalty and good will, and so the herald
of disorder. Yea, even Understanding is but a Blossom of the Tao, and
foreshadoweth Stupidity.

So then the Tao-Man holdeth to Mass, and avoideth Motion; he is attached
to the Root, not to the flower. He leaveth the one, and cleaveth to the
other.

39. —