===== Chapter 80 =====

The small kingdom [with] few people:

Causes them to have the equipment of ten noblemen but not to use it.

Causes the people to give weight to death and not to move far away.

Though having boats and carriages, they've no place to ride them.

Though having armor and weapons, they've no place to exhibit them.

Causes the people to return to knotting rope and using it.

Sweetens their meals

Beautifies their clothes

Pacifies their abodes

Gladdens [them in] their customs.

The neighboring kingdoms see each other in the distance

Hearing the sounds of each other's chickens and dogs.

The people arrive at old age [and eventually] die

Without going to or coming from each other.

Small country, few people - Hundreds of devices, But none are used. People ponder on death And don't travel far.

They have carriages and boats, But no one goes on board; Weapons and armour, But no one brandishes them.

They use knotted cords for counting. Sweet is their food, Beautiful
their clothes, Peaceful their homes, Delightful their customs.

Neighboring countries are so close You can hear their chickens and dogs.
But people grow old and die Without needing to come and go.

If a country is small its people are few.

Having tools in abundance, they're unwilling to use them.

Mindful of death, they do not venture far.

Having wagons and boats, they do not ride in them.

Having weapons and shields, they keep them out of sight.

To keep records they've returned to using knotted cords.

They relish their food,

Delight in their clothes,

Find peace in their homes,

And joy in their plain way of life.

Though the neighboring country is within sight,

And its roosters and dogs can be heard,

People live, grow old and die

Without ever leaving to visit their neighbors.

THE IDEAL STATE

A small, intimate, sparsely populated community,

Was thought by its ruler to be an ideal easily controlled state.

Labor saving devices and life's necessities,

Existing in abundance,

Were not used or needed.

Being satisfied with the quality of life,

There was no need to search for better things.

Having boats and carriages,

There appeared no use for them.

Having arms and weapons,

There was no occasion for their employment.

Being simple,

The commerce of the community required

no greater means than knotted cords

to ease the accounting of transactions.

Thus the people were:

- Satisfied with their food.

- Content with their clothing.

- Comfortable with their shelter.

- Happy with their customs and traditions.

Even though neighboring communities

were within sight and earshot of cocks and barking dogs,

They would leave each other in peace while they would grow old and die.

A petty country diminishes the people.

They possess ten times a hundred workers and yet do not use them.

They control the people by giving weight to death and the people do not move away.

Rather than owning boats and carriages, be free of a reason to ride in them.

Rather than being in armies and displaying weapons, be free without a reason for them.

Thus the people return to being continuously united and employed.

They will enjoy their food.

They will delight in their clothes.

They will be content with their homes.

They will enjoy their everyday lives.

Neighboring communities visit and help each other.

Both will listen together to the calls of each others' dogs and roosters.

At its height the people grow old and die without a reason to inspect each other.

ISOLATION

In a little kingdom of few people it should be the order that though

there were men able to do the work of ten men or five score, they should

not be employed. Though the people regarded death as sorrowful, yet they

should not wish to go elsewhere.

They
should have boats and wagons, yet no necessity to travel; corslets

and weapons, yet no occasion to fight.

For
communication they should use knotted cords.

They
should deem their food sweet, their clothes beautiful, their houses

homes, their customs delightful.

There
should be another state within view, so that its fowls and dogs

should be heard; yet to old age, even to death, the people should hold no

traffic with it.

In a little state with a small population, I would so order it, that,though there were individuals with the abilities of ten or a hundred men,there would be no employment of them; I would make the people, while lookingon death as a grievous thing, yet not remove elsewhere (to avoid it). Thoughthey had boats and carriages, they should have no occasion to ride in them;though they had buff coats and sharp weapons, they should have no occasionto don or use them. I would make the people return to the use of knottedcords (instead of the written characters). They should think their (coarse)food sweet: their (plain) clothes beautiful; their (poor) dwellings placesof rest; and their common (simple) ways sources of enjoyment. There shouldbe a neighboring state within sight, and the voices of the fowls and dogsshould be heard all the way from it to us, but I would make the peopleto old age, even to death, not have any intercourse with it.

May mankind live in freedom, equality and brotherhood again,

So that there will be no need for leaders and superiors

Then people won't fear death any longer

And won't try to escape death

May it be that people don't feel the need anymore,

To move themselves about in vehicles

And that they will have nothing to defend anymore

May humankind abandon their instruments and machines,

And enjoy the seeds of the fruit-bearing plants

Those were meant as our food

May they feel shamelessly proud of their natural beauty again

May they stop locking themselves away in cities and houses,

And start enjoying creation

And if some fools still lock themselves away in nations,

Civilizations, cities and houses

May the wise men keep themselves far from this,

And live happily ever after

The ideal state is a small intimate community Where all the necessities of life are present in abundance. There everyone is satisfied to live and die without looking around for greener pastures.

Even if they have cars or boats, they do not use them for travelling abroad. Even if they have police and fortifications, these are never put to use.

Business transactions are simple enough to be calculated on one's fingers rather than requiring complicated bookkeeping. The people are satisfied with their food, Contented with their clothing, Comfortable in their dwellings, And happy with their customs.

Even though neighbouring communities are within sight, And the crowing of the neighbour's cocks and barking of the neighbour's dogs are within hearing, They grow old and die without ever troubling themselves to go outside of their own communities.

Given a small country with few inhabitants,

He could bring it about that through

There should be among the people contrivances requiring ten times,

A hundred times less labour, they would not use them.

He could bring it about that the people would be ready

To lay down their lives and lay them down again in defence of their homes,

Tather than emigrate.

There might still be boats and carriage,

But no one would go in them;

There might still be weapons of war,

But no one would drill with them.

He could bring it about that

"The people should have no use for any from of writing save knotted ropes,

Should be contented with their food, pleased with their clothing,

Satisfied with their homes,

Should take pleasure in their rustic tasks.

The next place might be so near at hand

That one could one could hear the cocks crowing in it, the dogs barking;

But the people would grow old and die without ever having been there".

Let the state be small.

Let the people be few.

Though they have equipment to arm ten battalions

they do not do it.

They take death seriously and do not venture far.

They have ships and carts

but there is no place they want to go.

They have armor and weapons

but they are not displayed.

Men return to knotting rope.

They enjoy their meals and are comfortable in their clothes.

They are content in their homes and happy with their lives.

Though the neighboring state is so close

you can hear the cocks and dogs,

they leave each other in peace as they grow old and die.

Shrink the domain, spread out the people

Let there be tens & hundreds of people with specialties

But unemployed

Let the people feel the weight of death

And not wander far

Though there be boats & wagons

No place to ride them

Though there be armor & weapons

No reason to show them

Let the people return to knotting cords

And counting on these

(To) sweetening their own food

Embroidering their own clothing

Secure in their own homes

Rejoicing in their own customs

Neighboring realms overlook one another

The sounds of each other's roosters and dogs are heard

(Yet) the people grow old & die

Without goings & comings between them

Utopia

Let the states be small and the people few -

Bring it about that there are weapons for "tens" and "hundreds",

Yet let no one use them;

Have the people regard death gravely

and put migrating far from their minds.

Though they might have boats and carriages,

no one will use them;

Though they might have armor and weapons,

no one will display them;

Have the people return to the knotting cords

And using them.

They will relish their food,

Regard their clothing as beautiful,

Delight in their customs,

And feel safe and secure in thir homes.

Neighboring sates might overlook one another,

And the sound of chickens and dogs might be overheard,

Yet the people will arrive at old age and death

with no comings and goings between them.

Let there be small countries with few people. Let the people have no use for complicated machinery. Let them be mindful of death so that they don't move too far from their birthplaces.

If there be boats and carriages, let there be nowhere to take them to. If there are weapons, let there be no occasion to display them.

Let the people's responsibilities be few enough that they may remember them by knotting a string. Let them enjoy their food, be content with their clothes, be satisfied with their homes, and take pleasure in their customs.

Though the next country may be close enough to hear the barking of dogs and the crowing of its rooster, let the people grow old and die without feeling compelled to visit it.

Diminish the size of your inner nation;

Let it become as small as is needed.

Let its talents be manifold and diverse,

But never used or displayed.

Naturally treasure the life of your humanity,

But do not let death pursue you.

You have boats for sailing,

Wagons for loading,

But no need to guide them.

You have weapons to attack and defend,

Yet no need to bear them before others.

In communicating with people,

Return to the simplest means.

Eat well, and enjoy it;

Dress both for comfort and beauty.

Nurture harmony in your dwelling space.

Know the daily joy of simplicity.

You will see and be seen by others:

There may be crowing and barking among you,

As between roosters and dogs.

But you need not be trapped in this commerce,

For to the end of your days,

You will be completely sufficient unto yourself.

Discovering the essence through discarding the excessive is a recurring theme in the Tao Te Ching, and it applies to both inner and outer government. Chapter 48 pictured the growth of the natural personality as a process of diminishment and disburdening, which is contrasted with the commerce of ego-activity. Here, in Chapter 80, a different set of metaphors for this process is presented. Lao Tzu wants us to know not merely what Te is not, but what it is: what it feels like, how it manifests itself in society, and how entirely sufficient it is to the management of a natural life.

The expression, Po chi'h chi, here rendered as "Let your talents be manifold and diverse," is often translated as "labor saving devices." I was led to understand this expression as a metaphor for cleverness, or the agile use of the intellect. Lao Tzu is saying that cleverness is not a quality to be demonized or despised, but rather to be transformed by placing it at the service of one's feeling nature; it is not to be put on display or used to humiliate or debase others.

"Wagons for loading" is another I Ching metaphor that Lao Tzu draws upon; it comes from Hexagram 14, line 2. In The Oracle of the Cosmic Way text, this is found to be a metaphor for the Helper of Transformation. (p. 206)—that is, a transformative energy that creates enduring change within a person or situation.

"There may be crowing and barking among you" refers to the activity of ego, both in conflict, self-display, and the egotistical commerce referred to in Chapter 48. However, in this poem, Lao Tzu assures us that we have the inner wherewithal to recognize such error and go on without becoming trapped in its contentious snares.

The Ideal State

The
ideal state is small with few people.

It has abundance of goods, beyond possible use.

Understanding death, the people do not emigrate.

Though
they have vessels and vehicles,

they do not travel far in them.

Though they have armor and weapons,

they have no need to display them.

Let
them use knotted ropes for simple reckoning,

be satisfied with their food,

be attractive in their clothing,

be comfortable in their homes,

be happy with their customs.

Though
from other states the dog's bark

and cock's crow can clearly be heard,

the people never leave the ideal state.

A state may be small, and the population sparse, yet the people should be taught not to rely on force; they should be made to comprehend the gravity of death, and the futility of emigration. Then, though they had boats and carts, they would have no use for them; though they had armour and weapons they would not display them. They should be taught to return to the use of the quippo; to be content with their food, their clothing, their dwellings, and to be happy in their traditions. Though neighbouring states were within sight, and the people should hear the barking of their dogs and the crowing of their cocks, they would grow old and die without visiting them.

Supposing here is a small state with few people.

Though there are various vessels I will not have them put in use.

I will make the people regard death as a grave matter and not go far away.

Though they have boats and carraiges they will not travel in them.

Though they have armour and weapons they will not show them.

I will let them restore the use of knotted cords (instead of writing).

They will be satisfied with their food.

Delighted in their dress;

Comfortable in their dwellings;

Happy with their customs.

Though the neighbouring states are within sight

And their cocks' crowing and dogs' barking within hearing;

The people (of the small state) will not go there their whole lives.

Primitivist Independence

'Small' the state and 'few' the people.

Bring about that having artifacts by the tens and hundreds yet they won't use
them.

Bring it about that the people "weight" death and don't venture far.

Although they have boats and chariots, they don't have reasons to ride in them.

Although they have armour and weapons, they don't have reasons to marshall them.

Bring it about that humans revert to knotting string and use that.

"Sweet' their food; "beautiful' their clothing.

'Peaceful' their neighborhoods; 'pleasant' their customs.

Nearby states can see each other.

And hear the sounds of each other's chickens and dogs.

The peoples reach old age and death without any interaction.

There is a kingdom which is small and sparsely populated.

There are numerous implements, but no one uses them.

The people love their lives and no one wants to move afar.

Boats and carriages are available, but no one rides them.

Fine weapons are in their possession, but no one uses them.

The people are back in the times when knotted cords were used to record things.

They enjoy fine delicacies and are handsome in their dress.

They are happy with their residences and are pleased with their traditions.

Although the next state is within sight, and the sounds of cocks crowing and dogs barking are heard,

The people live their whole lives without traveling to and fro.

A small country with a limited population ensures that even though the people may have many valuables, they do not need to use them.

The ruler lets the people consider death as a serious matter,

so that they will not wish to leave their homes.

Though they have ships and carriages, they will not use them;

and though they have soldiers and arms, there is no need to deploy them.

The ruler lets the people return to the time of knotting ropes to record information.

They will find pleasure in their tasteless food.

They will find beauty in their simple clothes.

They will find peace in their small houses.

They will enjoy their own customs.

They can see the neighbouring country.

They can even hear the sounds of each other's roosters and dogs.

They will grow old and die, but remain content never to go to the neighbouring country.

A small state with few people:

Let there be utensils ten,

A hundred times its population

Without being used;

Let the people take death seriously,

And stay away from migration;

Let there be boats and carriages

With no occasion to ride them;

Let there be armor and weapons

With no occasion to display them;

Let the sovereign revert to tying knots

With a rope and put it to use.

Make their food delicious,

Their clothes beautiful,

Their customs joyous,

Their habitations comfortable.

Neighboring states may be within sight of each other,

And sounds of roosters and dogs within hearing,

Yet the people, to their old age and death,

Never come and go visiting one another.

Imagine a small land with few people.

Even if it contains plenty of vessels, I will not use them.

I will induce the people to respect death, and not to go wandering far afield.

Even if they have boats and chariots, they will not travel in them,

Even if they have weapons and armor, they will not bear them.

I will bring them back to knotted cords instead of writings.

Their food will satisfy them,

Their clothing will please them,

Their dwellings will be full of tranquillity,

Their customs will be full of happiness.

Even though the neighboring lands are within view,

And the crowing of the roosters and the barking of the dogs from there are audible,

The people of that small country will not go there in their lifetime.

Reduce the size of the population and the state.

Ensure that even though the people have tools of war for a troop or a battalion
they will not use them;

And also that they will be reluctant to move to distant places because they
look on death as no light matter.

Even
when they have ships and carts, they will have no use for them;

And even when they have armor and weapons, they will have no occasion to make
a show of them.

Bring
it about that the people will return to the use of the knotted rope,

Will find relish in their food

And beauty in their clothes,

Will be content in their abode

And happy in the way they live.

Though
adjoining states are within sight of one another,

And the sound of dogs barking and cocks crowing in one state can be heard in
another,

yet the people of one state will grow old and die without having had any dealings
with those of another.

Remaining in Isolation

In a small country with few people let there be aldermen and mayors who are possessed of power over men but would not use it. Induce people to grieve at death but do not cause them to move to a distance. Although they had ships and carriages, they should find no occasion to ride in them. Although they had armours and weapons, they should find no occasion to don them.

2 Induce people to return to [the old custom of] knotted cords and to use them [in the place of writing], to delight in their food, to be proud of their clothes, to be content with their homes, and to rejoice in their customs: then in a neighboring state within sight, the voices of the cocks and dogs would be within hearing, yet the people might grow old and die before they visited one another.

When happy: Even if you have occult powers, they will not be used, You can achieve great works, but there is no need, You can travel far and wide, but you stay at home, You can become a great man, but you remain unknown, You can control people, but you leave them be. Joy is found in ordinary goings on. Even though you may be able to see the border to the next country, you are content to die of old age never having been there.

Small states.

Few people.

All sorts of utensils, not in use.

The populace value death, unwilling to move.

Vehicles available, not in use.

Weaponry available, not on display.

Tying knots for events.

Superbly governed.

Well fed, beautifully clad, serenely housed, happily serenad'd.

Neighboring states within sights.

Crowing and barking heard across states.

From birth to death, no interstate communication.

Let nations grow smaller and smaller and people fewer and fewer,

let weapons become rare

and superfluous,

let people feel death's gravity again

and never wander far from home.

Then boat and carriage will sit unused

and shield and sword lie unnoticed.

Let people knot ropes for notation again and never need anything more,

let them find pleasure in their food and beauty in their clothes, peace in their homes and joy in their ancestral ways.

Then people in neighboring nations will look across to each other,

their chickens and dogs calling back and forth,

and yet they'll grow old and die without bothering to exchange visits.

There exists a small state with a few people.

Wherein:

Plenty of useful tools are not being used.

Valuing life, the people do not migrate faraway.

Though there are boats and carriages, no one rides in them.

Let the people return to the time of tying knots on ropes for reckoning.

Let them:

Enjoy their food,

Beautify their clothing,

Live in peace at home, and

Be happy with their heritage.

The people in neighbouring states are within sight of each other,

The crowing of cocks and barking of dogs are heard from each other,

Yet the people die of old age without visiting with each other.

A
tiny nation, few people

Suppose the presence of 10 or one hundred times too many tools

Yet they are unused

Suppose people heavy with death

Yet lack moving far.

Even
present with boats and carriages

There is an absence of a place to be riding

Even present with armor and weapons

There is an absence of a place to be displaying them.

Suppose
men return to knotting cords and using them

What is eaten is sweet

What serves as clothing is beautiful

What is a home is peaceful

What is common is joyful.

Nearby
nations overlook each other

Crowing, barking sounds are heard by each other

People reach old age and die

Without coming and going between each other.

If I were king of a little state, of a little people, I would take care to use (put in charge) the few dozen capable men that this state would contain.

I would prevent my subjects from traveling, by making them fear possible accidental death so much that they would not dare climb into a boat or carriage. I would prohibit all use of weapons.

As for writing and calculating, I would oblige them to go back to knotted cords. Then they would find their food tasty, their clothes fine, their houses peaceful, and their manners and customs agreeable.

(I would prevent curiosity and communication to the point where) my subjects would hear the noise of the cocks and dogs of the neighbouring state, but die from old age without having crossed the border and had relationships with the people there.

Small country, few people

Let them have many weapons but not use them

Let the people regard death seriously

And not migrate far away

Although they have boats and chariots

They have no need to take them

Although they have armors and weapons

They have no need to display them

Let the people return to tying knots and using them

Savor their food, admire their clothes

Content in their homes, happy in their customs

Neighboring countries see one another

Hear the sounds of roosters and dogs from one another

The people, until they grow old and die

Do not go back and forth with one another

The ideal place is a small country with few people in it. This place is free of conflict and strife. Even though they have hundreds of military instruments, they don't need to use them. The people treat life-and-death issues with serious regard, and do not need to risk their lives in a dangerous migration to faraway places.

Peace prevails in such a place, so even though the people have boats and chariots, they have no need to use them to get away from this country. Similarly, even though they are no pacifists and possess armors and weapons, they have no need to show aggression by putting them on display.

The people live simply and return to the old way of life. They make full use of simple solutions, such as tying knots to record events. Their food is not elaborate, but they find it delicious; their clothes are not extravagant, and yet beautiful in their elegant simplicity. Their homes are not luxurious, but they feel content, safe and comfortable in them. Their customs are down-to-earth, and yet they find them sincere, direct, and joyful.

This country and its neighbors are not far apart. They are within visual range of one another, as well as hearing range. While in one country, one can hear the dogs and roosters of a neighboring country.

Despite the close distance between them, there is no friction among these countries. The people of the region grow old and die without ever getting into petty squabbles with one another. Because they are content and peaceful, they simply do not engage in back-and-forth deception, contention and retribution with their neighbors.

CONTENTMENT

In a small country with few people let there be officers over tens and hundreds but not to exercise power. Let the people be not afraid of death, nor desire to move to a distance. Then though there be ships and carriages, they will have no occasion to use them. Though there be armor and weapons there will be no occasion for donning them. The people can return to p. 52 knotted cords for their records, they can delight in their food, be proud of their clothes, be content with their dwellings, rejoice in their customs.

Other states may be close neighbors, their cocks and dogs may be mutually heard, people will come to old age and die but will have no desire to go or come.

A small state with few people.

Let the implements (ch'ih) for ten and hundred men be unused,

Let the people fear death such that they do not move far away.

Although there are boats and carriages,

There are no places to ride them to.

Although there are weapons and armours,

There are no occasions to display them.

Let the people again tie ropes and use them (as memory aids).

Let them enjoy their food,

Consider their clothing beautiful,

Be contented with their dwellings,

And happy with their customs.

The neighbouring states overlooking one another,

The dogs' barkings and cocks' crowings are heard from other states,

Yet till they are old and dying the people do not visit one another.

The Ideal State

The ideal state is small with few people. It has abundance of goods, beyond possible use; understanding death, the people do not emigrate; though they have vessels and vehicles, they do not travel far in them; though they have armor and weapons, they have no need to display them.

Let them use knotted ropes for simple reckoning; be satisfied with their food; be attractive in their clothing; be comfortable in their homes; be happy with their customs. Though from other states dog's bark and cock's crow can clearly be heard, the people never leave the ideal state.

Imagine a small country with a small population.

They have lots of technology, but they use none of it.

They take the prospect of death seriously

and thus do not travel far from home.

They have boats and carriages, but no one takes them out.

They have weapons and armor,

but no one takes them out of the armory.

Instead of writing, they have gone back

to the old system of cord–knotting.

They enjoy their plain but good food,

their simple but fine clothing,

their humble but secure homes.

They are happy with their way of life.

The next country is so close that the crowing of the cocks and

the barking of the dogs over there can be easily heard over here;

and yet the people over here grow old and die

without ever having been over there.

Eighty

A small country has fewer people.

Though there are machines that can work ten to a hundred times faster than man,
they are not needed.

The people take death seriously and do not travel far.

Though they have boats and carriages, no one uses them.

Though they have armor and weapons, no one displays them.

Men return to the knotting of rope in place of writing.

Their food is plain and good, their clothes fine but simple, their homes secure;

They are happy in their ways.

Though they live within sight of their neighbors,

And crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard across the way,

Yet they leave each other in peace while they grow old and die.

The state should be small;

The population should be sparse.

Tools, though of many kinds,

Should not be used.

Teach the people to fear death

And not to migrate to remote places;

Although they have ships and carts,

They will have no need to use them;

Although they are well armed with weapons,

They will have no place to make them effective.

Encourage the people to return to the condition

Under which the knotted rope was used to record things.

The world best ruled is a place where

The people will have delicious food,

beautiful clothes,

comfortable living quarters,

cheerful customs.

Though within easy reach of neighbouring states,

The dog's barking and the cock's crowing in one state are heard in another;

The people of one state will never have dealings with those of another,

Even if they get old and die.

Let the state be small and its people few.

Let the thousand contrivances go idle.

Let the people take death seriously and not move to distant places.

Though they may have boats and carriages,

They will not ride in them.

Though they may have armor and weapons,

They will not display them.

Let the people return to the practice of knotting cords.

They will relish what they eat,

Find their clothes beautiful,

Be content in their homes,

Delight in their customs.

States may be within sight of one another,

So that one may hear cocks and dogs from a neighboring state;

Yet people will grow old and die

Without trafficking with another state.

In a small and sparsely populated country,

Even if there are many talented military leaders, the nation does not require their services.

People treasure their lives and livelihoods that they loathe to emigrate.

Although there are boats and carriages, no one wants to use them.

While there are armour and weapons, there is no place to exhibit them.

People revert back to ancient way of recording events by tying knots on the string.

Their food is sumptuous.

Their garments are beautiful.

Their lodgings are comfortable.

Their social mores and customs are unsophisticated but joyous.

The neighbouring states can be sighted, and the noises of barking dogs and crowing cocks can be heard reciprocally.

Yet, people will never visit each other, never in a million years.

Independence

Tu Li

A state should be small in size and population.

It should teach the people not to use arms,

Even though arms may be found in abundance.

It should teach the people

To view death as a serious matter,

And not to move to a far-away place.

Though there are boats and carriages,

There is no occasion to use them;

Though there are arms and soldiers,

There is no occasion to stage public reviews.

The people are taught -

To resume the practice of tying knots;

To enjoy their daily food;

To wear beautiful clothes;

To enhance the comfort of their homes;

And to take delight in their social customs.

Neighbor states may be within sight of one another,

And the barking of dogs and the crowing of cocks

In one of them may be heard in the others,

Yet the people to the end of their days,

Do not maintain intercourse with their neighbors.

Picture my little country with its few inhabitants.

Maybe there are contraptions in it for reducing labour to a tenth, a hundredth, but why should they be used?

I would have my people take death seriously and not go abroad to seek it, though they be ready enough to die wice

over to defend their homes.

Maybe there are boats and carriages in my little country, but why should the people travel in them?

Maybe there are weapons and armour, but these are kept in the background, unused.

I would let my people jog their memories with knotted cords and not depend on writing.

I would have them satisfied with their food; their clothing should be pleasant; their homes comfortable; and they

would take delight in the performance of the daily round.

The neighbouring country might be so near that my people would hear the cocks crow and the dogs bark over there;

but old age might come and even death itself, and yet my people would have felt no need to cross the border.

Oh for a small country with few people!

There may be contrivances

In ten-fold or hundred-fold abundance,

But the people don't use them.

Let the people mind death

And not move away.

Tough there are boats and carriages,

There is no occasion to ride them.

Though there are weapons and arms,

There is no occasion to show them.

Let the people again knot cords.

Let them enjoy their food,

Take pleasure in their clothes,

Find contentment in their houses,

And delight in their tasks.

Another country may be so near

That each hears the noise

Of the other's cocks and dogs,

But until the end of their days,

The two people never mingle.

Let there be small communities with few inhabitants.

The supply of vessels may be more than enough,

yet no one would use them.

The inhabitants would love living there so dearly that they would never wish to move to another place.

They may have every kind of vehicle,

but they would not bother to ride them.

They may have powerful weapons,

but they would not resort to using them.

They would return to a simple system of cords and knots to record their simple events,

as was done in ancient times.

They would be content with plain food,

pleased with simple clothing,

satisfied with rustic but cozy homes,

and would cling to their natural way of life.

The neighboring country would be so close at hand that one could hear its roosters crowing and its dogs barking along the boundaries.

But, to the end of their days, people would rarely trespass the territory of another's life.

LXXX.

Standing
Alone

Suppose
I had a country small,

With
people few, and I had there

Some
officers of ten,

Or of
a hundred men,

I d not
employ those men at all;

Though
death were feared, unfrightened then,

My
people would not emigrate elsewhere.

They
might have carriages and boats,

But
not in them to ride away,

They
might have warlike arms,

But
never war s alarms

Would
call them with their hateful notes;

They d
even forget how writing charms,

And
knotted cords again they would display.

Then
would they relish homely food,

Their
plain clothes would seem elegant,

Though
dwellings might be poor,

Content
would guard the door,

And
simple habits, plain and good, Far better than they knew before,

A
sense of fresh enjoyment would implant.

A
neighboring state might be in sight,

The
voice of fowls and dogs be heard,

But
life like that would make

My
people such joy take

In their
own state, that till the night

Of age should their enjoyment slake,

And
they should die, they d not exchange a word.

Take a small kingdom and a few people,

Cause ten or a hundred of them to carry weapons,

But not to use them.

Cause the people to fear death,

Do not let them travel far,

Though they may have boats and carriages,

Let them use them only within the kingdom.

Though they may have soldiers in uniform,

Let them parade only within the kingdom.

Cause the people again to have knotted cords,

And to use them (instead of written characters).

Their food would be sweet,

Their clothing would be beautiful in their own eyes,

Their dwellings would be resting-places,

They would love their simple ways.

If another kingdom were so near

That they could hear the sounds of dogs and fowls,

They would not come into mutual contact

Until they all grew old and died.

Ah, for a small country

with a small population

! Though there are

very handy mechanical inventions,

the people

have no use for them.

Let them notice death

and not go to far away places.

Ships and tanks,

and weapons of war,

there may still be,

but there are no occasions

for using or displaying them.

Let the people go back to sending messages by knotting cords.

(Let nothing be urgent)

See to it that they are

happy with their food,

pleased with their clothing,

satisfied with their houses,

and use the simple ways of living.

Though there may be

another country so close

that they are in sight of each other

and the crowing of cocks

and barking of dogs

in one place

can be heard in the other,

yet there is no traffic

between them,

and throughout their lives

the two peoples

have nothing to do with each other.

A small country with few inhabitants where, though there be tools which can do the work of ten or a hundred men, (the people) may be induced not to use them!

Where the people may be induced to regard death gravely and not to move to distant places!

Where, though there be boats and carts, there would be nothing to load them with and where, though there are cuirasses and arms, there would be nowhere to drill in them!

Where the people may be induced to revert to the use of knotted cords, to savour their own food, to admire their own clothing, to take their ease in their own homes and to delight in their own customs!

Where, though a neighbouring country may be within sight, so that they hear each other's cocks crowing and dogs barking, yet the inhabitants, till they die of old age, would never meet one another!

In a little state with a small population, I would so order it,

that, though there were individuals with the abilities of ten or a

hundred men, there should be no employment of them; I would make the

people, while looking on death as a grievous thing, yet not remove

elsewhere (to avoid it).

Though
they had boats and carriages, they should have no occasion

to ride in them; though they had buff coats and sharp weapons, they

should have no occasion to don or use them.

I
would make the people return to the use of knotted cords (instead

of the written characters).

They
should think their (coarse) food sweet; their (plain) clothes

beautiful; their (poor) dwellings places of rest; and their common

(simple) ways sources of enjoyment.

There
should be a neighbouring state within sight, and the voices

of the fowls and dogs should be heard all the way from it to us, but I

would make the people to old age, even to death, not have any

intercourse with it.

Let there be a small state with few people in it,
where military weapons
get no use;
let the people view solemnly the idea of death
and they
will banish the thought of ever moving away:
They
may have carts and boats
but there will be no NEED to ride in them;

they may have armor and weapons
but they will never NEED to display them.

Let
the people go back to tying knots for record-keeping;
let their food be savory;

their clothing beautiful;
their customs pleasurable;
their homes
secure.
Though
they may gaze across at a neighbor's holdings
and hear the sounds of it's
dogs and chickens,
they will not bother them, coming and going.
They
will die of happy old age.

If
a land is small and the people few

And the rulers recognize what's needed

The simple ways of courtesy

Are happily and gladly heeded

For
people need so little

To live their lives aright

Are food and home and clothing

Not enough for pure delight?

Though
nearby lands are close enough

To hear their roosters crow

The people will be so content

That not a one will want to go

AH, for a small country with a small population!

Though there are highly efficient mechanical

contrivances, the people have no use for them. Let them

mind death and refrain from migrating to distant places.

Boats and carriages, weapons and armour there may still

be, but there are no occasions for using or displaying

them. Let the people revert to communication by

knotting cords. See to it that they are contented with

their food, pleased with their clothing, satisfied with

their houses, and inured to their simple ways of living.

Though there may be another country in the

neighbourhood so close that they are within sight of

each other and the crowing of cocks and barking of dogs

in one place can be heard in the other, yet there is no

traffic between them, and throughout their lives the two

peoples have nothing to do with each other.

I see a small country of small population.

A simple folk, who even if highly skilled work simply and easily.

Tools are seldom used. They do not bother to invent time-saving appliances.

They would dearly love life, and would take care to avoid death.

Since they would love their homes and land, they would not care to wander.

Even with their horses, boats and carts, they do not wish to travel about.

Though they may have armor and weapons, these are kept out of sight.

These people would return to simple techniques for record keeping.

Their food would be tasty but simple; their clothing would be unpretentious.

They would be content with their simple homes, and the simple pleasures and customs of a simple people.

And even though there might be a neighboring land within sight,

so that the crowing of roosters and the barking of dogs can be heard from it;

these people will have lived their entire life without ever having gone to that country.

Small countries with few people are best.

Give them all of the things they want,

and they will see that they do not need them.

Teach them that death is a serious thing,

and to be content to never leave their homes.

Even though they have plenty

of horses, wagons and boats,

they won't feel that they need to use them.

Even if they have weapons and shields,

they will keep them out of sight.

Let people enjoy the simple technologies,

let them enjoy their food,

let them make their own clothes,

let them be content with their own homes,

and delight in the customs that they cherish.

Although the next country is close enough

that they can hear their roosters crowing and dogs barking,

they are content never to visit each other

all of the days of their life.

If you want to be free, learn to live simply.

Use what you have and be content where you are. Quit trying to solve your problems by moving to another place, by changing mates or careers.

Leave your car in the garage. If you have a gun, put it away. Sell that complex computer and go back to using pencil and paper. Rather than read every new book that comes along, reread the classics.

Eat food grown locally. Wear simple, durable clothing. Keep a small home, uncluttered and easy to clean. Keep an open calendar with periods of uncommitted time. Have a spiritual practice and let family customs grow.

Of course, the world is full of novelty and adventures. New opportunities come along every day.

So what?

It is best to have smal communities with few people.

And although they have goods and equipment in abundance

few of them are even used.

They have great love of life,

and are content to be right where they are.

And although they have boats and carriages,

There is no place they particularly want to go.

And although they have access to weapons and machineries

of war, they have no desire to show them off.

Let people return to simplicity, working with their own hands.

Then they will find joy in their food

Beauty in their simple clothes

Peace in their living

Fulfillment in their traditions.

And although they live within sight of neighboring states

And their roosters and dogs are heard by one another

The people are content to grow old and die

Without having gone to see their neighbor states.

A
peaceful nation has few people and

flows in harmony and oneness.

They have weapons of war but they have no

inclination to use them.

They are indifferent to death and indifferent

to living elsewhere.

They have boats and carriages

but seldom use them.

They have weapons of war but

no one displays them.

They live a simple life:

their food is nourishing,

their clothes are adequate,

their dwellings are secure.

They are at peace and in harmony

with all things.

Even
though they live within sight

of a neighboring nation

and hear the sounds of dogs and

children,

they grow old and perish

without ever desiring to go there.

A small country with few people,

who are allowed the use of their Uncles' tools;

but they don't use them.

Let people honor the dead and not move far away.

Although there are boats and carriages, none are used.

Although there are excellent weapons, none are displayed.

Let people return to the use of reckoning cords from here on;

be pleased with their food, satisfied with their clothing,

content in their homes, and happy with their customs.

Adjacent lands within sight of each other,

within the sound of each other's chickens and dogs;

where people live long lives, and die never having met.

The smaller the country, the fewer the people.1

Even though they have machines which can do the work of ten, or a hundred men, they are never used.

The people take death seriously, so do not travel far.2

Even though they have boats and carriages, no one rides in them.

Even though they have armour and weapons, no one displays them.

Let the people return to knotting cords.3

Let them find their plain food sweet,

their simple clothes fine,

their modest dwellings secure;

And they would be happy with their lifestyle.

Although the two peoples of the neighbouring countries are so close

That they can see each other, and hear each other's cocks crowing and dogs barking,

They will leave each other alone and grow old and die

Without ever having visited each other.

1. In this chapter, Lao Tzu describes an ideal society.

2. i.e. the more one travels, the more one risks accident and injury. Besides, in an ideal society, affairs would be conducted in such a way that need for travel becomes redundant.

3. historically, a practice prior to, and more simple than, writing.

The wise person reduces the importance of governments

And simplifies the modes of living,

So that people use fewer tools and wares

And treasure simplicity in their lives,

So that, though there are vehicles,

People do not take them.

And, though there are weapons,

People do not carry them.

And, though there are records,

Tying knots will serve the record-keeping purpose.

Thus, the highest political achievement is one

In which people savor their food,

Like the beauty of their clothes,

Appreciate their safe and peaceful homes,

Enjoy their social customs;

And in which roosters and dogs

Can be heard between countries;

But people, all their lives,

Have no need to go across the borders.

Oh for a small country with few people! Supposing there were men with the talents of dozens and hundreds, but no one employed them. Supposing the people took death seriously, and did not travel far distances.

Although there exist boats and carriages, they have no occasion to ride in them. Although there exist armour and weapons, they have no occasion to show them off.

Supposing people returned to knotting cords, and using this as writing. They find their food savoury they find their clothes elegant they are content with their homes they are fond of their folkways.

Neighbouring states are in sight of one another so they hear the sounds of each others' dogs and roosters - but people reach old age and die with no comings and goings between them.

About state structure I think the following:

It is better when the country is small and population is rare.

Even if there is much weapon, it should not be used. War ships and chariots should be used neither. Warriors should not wage war.

One has to make the life in the country such that people do not want to leave this country.

It is good if everyone has good food, beautiful clothes, cozy houses, joyful life.

It is good to look with love at neighbor states, listen to how cocks crow there and dogs bark.

It is good that people who reach old age cognize the Perfection and leave this world so that they do not need to return here.

In a small community having few people,

To accumulate useless things does not make sense.

To live a simple life is more important.

To
know the world, travel is not necessary,

The light of mind could be used instead.

For defense, the display of weapons is not necessary,

They should be kept hidden until needed.

The
good relationships with neighbours are vital,

For peace and tranquility to reign.

The Wise People attains thus freedom.

Diminish
the size and population of a country. Let them have the utensils of squads and
platoons yet be unwilling to use them. Let the people take death as a serious
matter and so not venture far away, and even though they have boats and carts,
not ride in them. Even though they have shields and edged weapons, let them
not ever display them. Let the people revert to recording information by knotting
cords. Let them relish their food, find their clothing beautiful, be content
with their dwellings, and take joy in their customs. Although they be within
sight of neighboring kingdoms, so that they can hear each others' dogs and roosters,
let them never visit back and forth all the days of their lives.

The state may be small; its people may be few.

Let the people have tenfold and one-hundredfold of utensils,

But never make use of them.

Let the people weigh death heavily

And have no desires to move far away.

Though there be boats and carriages,

No one will ride in them.

Though there be armour and weapons,

No one will exhibit them.

Let the people return to tying knots and using them.

Relish their food,

Appreciate their clothes,

Secure in their homes,

Happy with their customs.

The neighboring states will be so close that they can see each other, and hear the sounds of roosters and dogs.

But the people will grow old and die,

Without having visited each other.

Fulfilling Independence

In a small organization with a few people;

Let there be ten or a hundred times

More tools than they can use.

Let the people value their lives

And yet not move far away.

Even though there are boats and carriages,

There is no occasion to use them.

Even though there are armor and weapons,

There is no occasion to display them.

Let the people again knot cords and use them.

Their food will be pleasing.

Their clothes will be fine.

Their homes will be secure.

Their customs will be joyful.

Nearby organizations may watch each other;

Their crowing and barking may be heard.

Yet the people may grow old and die

Without coming or going between them.

Live a long and healthy life. Be content with your home and your village. Your travels need not leave your home.

The ideal land is small

Its people very few,

Where tools abound

Ten times or yet

A hundred-fold

Beyond their use;

Where people die

And die again

But never emigrate;

Have boats and carts

Which no one rides.

Weapons have they

And armor too,

But none displayed.

The folk returns

To use again

The knotted chords.

Their meat is sweet;

Their clothes adorned,

Their homes at peace,

Their customs charm.

And
neighbor lands

Are juxtaposed

So each may hear

The barking dogs,

The crowing cocks

Across the way;

Where folks grow old

And folks will die

And never once

Exchange a call.

Let the state be small, and let the population be sparse.

Though there are various kinds of instruments, let them not be used;

Let the people not risk their lives, not move to distant places;

Though there be boats and carriages,

There is no occasion to ride in them;

Though there are weapons and military equipment,

There is no occasion to display them.

Let the people return to the use of knotted cord sin recording events, delight in their food, dress in beauty, dwell in comfort, and enjoy their life.

The neighbouring states are within sight of each other, and the cries of roosters and dogs can be heard by one another,

But the people do not have any contact with each other until they die of old age.

Let the state be small and the common folk few.

Let there be military equipment for a company, then it would not be used.

Let the common folk take death seriously, then they would not travel far.

Although they had boats and carriages, they would have no occasion to ride in them.

Although they had shields and weapons, they would have no occasion to array them for battle.

Let the people again knot cords, then they would use them.

They would find their food so delicious, their clothes so beautiful, their dwellings so satisfying, and their customs so delightful that, though neighboring states might provide distant views of each other and the sounds of each other's chickens and dogs might even be heard, the common folk would reach old age without ever going back and forth between such places.

1. Let the country be small and people few—

2. Bring it about that there are weapons for "tens" and "hundreds," yet let
no one use them;

3. Have the people regard death gravely and put migrating far from their minds.

4. Though they might have boats and carriages, no one will ride them;

5. Though they might have armor and spears, no one will display them.

6. Have the people return to knotting cords and using them.

7.
They will relish their food,

8. Regard their clothing as beautiful,

9. Delight in their customs,

10. And feel safe and secure in their homes.

11. Neighboring states might overlook one another,

12. And the sounds of chickens and dogs might be overheard,

13. Yet the people will arrive at old age and death with no comings and goings
between them.

Lao Tzu had
a dream

about a small country

with very few people.

They didn't
need machines

to get their work done faster.

They took their lives seriously,

and stayed close to home.

They may have
owned

boats and carriages,

but they never went anywhere.

They may have owned weapons,

but they kept those weapons

locked up, securely hidden.

They had so few responsibilities,

they never had to make a To-Do list

to remember what had to be done.

They enjoyed
simple foods,

dressed plainly,

lived comfortably,

and kept their traditions alive.

And even though

their neighbors were so close

they could hear

the dogs barking at night,

they had no interest

in leaving their homes,

where they grew old peacefully

and died.

.

Home Is Comfortable

In a small country with few people

machines that can work ten or a hundred times faster

are not needed.

People who care about death do not travel far.

Even if there are ships and carriages, no one takes them.

Even if there are armor and weapons, no one displays them.

People return to knotted rope for records.

Food is tasty; clothes are beautiful;

home is comfortable; customs are delightful.

Though neighboring communities see each other

and hear each other's cocks crowing and dogs barking,

they may grow old and die without going there.

A country does well to remain small with few inhabitants who are provided with everything yet need little who love life and do not long to roam afar who have armor and weapons but do not use them who possess culture and scholarship yet prefer the usage and wisdom of the ancients.

Their food is natural yet tasty.

Their clothes are plain yet beautiful.

Their dwellings are simple yet comfortable and peaceful.

Their way of life is free and tolerant and a source of unity and contentment.

Though the neighboring State lies within reach and the effervescence of its life is calling temptingly to them they remain self-sufficient and serene and they grow old in peace free from the desire to stray afar.

Perfect Government

Lao Tze says,

The king of men should always think that his state is little, and his people a small population.

He would attribute the governing responsibility to ten or a hundred tribal elders.

His government would never consider to draft people's implements for government use.

Further, he would make his people's looking after departed ancestors estates an important duty, thus they would not move elsewhere.

Though the king of men has boats and carriages, he would have no occasion to ride on them.

Though he had buff coats and sharp weapons, he would have no occasion to use them.

He would make the people return to their pure custom which they used in antiquity - the knotted cord to remember events.

At that time, they thought their coarse food sweet;

their plain clothes beautiful;

their poor dwelling places restful;

and common simple ways sources of enjoyment.

There should be a neighboring state within sight, and the voices of fowls and dogs should be heard all the way from hither to thither, but the people to an old age, even to death, have no intention to visit each other.

STANDING ALONE

A
small country may have many machines,

but the people will have no use for them;

they will have boats and carriages

which they do not use;

their armour and weapons

are not displayed,

for they are serious when regarding death.

They do not travel far from home,

and make knots in ropes,

rather than do much writing.

The
food they eat is plain and good,

and their clothes are simple;

their homes are secure,

without the need of bolts and bars,

and they are happy in their ways.

'Though
the cockerels and dogs

of their neighbours

can be heard not far away,

the people of the villages

grow old and die in peace.

If a country is governed wisely,

its inhabitants will be content.

They enjoy the labor of their hands

and don't waste time inventing

labor-saving machines.

Since they dearly love their homes,

they aren't interested in travel.

There may be a few wagons and boats,

but these don't go anywhere.

There may be an arsenal of weapons,

but nobody ever uses them.

People enjoy their food,

take pleasure in being with their families,

spend weekends working in their gardens,

delight in the doings of the neighborhood.

And even though the next country is so close

that people can hear its roosters crowing and its dogs barking,

they are content to die of old age

without ever having gone to see it.

Prefer to rule a small kingdom with few people.

Even though there are abundant resources, prefer to use the one tenth or one hundredth.

Care only for their life and refrain from moving far away, even though there were war ships and chariots ready but no place to use them;

and there were arms and weapons ready but no front to deploy them.

He led them to a simple life even by use of "Knotted Cords" again,

To be contented with their foods, be beautiful with their clothes, be satisfied with their homes and be happy with their customs.

The neighboring countries are within sight of each other;

the voices of cocks and dogs were heard from both sides.

Yet the people might grow old and die before they would cross territories of each other.

A small country has few people.

Weapons are far more numerous than the people, but they are not used.

Let people be serious about death and enjoy a long journey.

Though there are carriages and boats, they are not useful for travel.

Let people return to:

Use the technique of knotting the rope,

Enjoying the food,

Appreciating the cloth,

Delighting in customs,

Settling into their living conditions.

The neighboring countries are in sight.

The sounds of dogs and chickens are heard.

People grow old and die without interference from each other.

LXXX

If
the tao held sway, nations would be small and people few

There might be weapons enough, but no one would use them or display them

All would regard fighting as a serious, unpleasant affair

They might have boats and carriages enough, but no one would ride them

All would be content with what they see and know

There might be laws and contracts, but no one would write them

All would pay their debts as they could, because no one would care if they didn't

Such
a land would delight in their food, their clothing, their traditions

And feel safe and secure in their homes

Though neighboring lands might be close enough that their songs are heard

One could grow old without ever having the urge to visit them

A Small State Has Few People

A small state has few people.

It has the people keep arms

but not use them.

It has them regard death gravely

and not go on distant campaigns.

Even if they have vehicles,

they have nowhere to drive them.

Even if they have weapons,

they have nowhere to use them.

It has the people go back to simple techniques,

relish their food,

like their clothes,

be comfortable in their ways,

and enjoy their work.

Neighboring states may be so close

they can hear each other's dogs and roosters,

but they make it so that the people

have never gone back and forth.

In small countries with fewer people,

No delicate utensils are used.

Make people fear death so that they refuse to venture far away.

Although there are vehicles and boats, nobody uses them.

Although there are troops and weapons, they are not deployed.

Let people once again use knot-tying to keep records.

Let people enjoy their food, beautify their clothes, live peacefully, and be happy with their traditions.

Although neighboring kingdoms are within sight; and dog barks and roster crows can be heard over the border, but people never interfere with each other in their lifetime.

[Suppose] there is (we establish) a small country with a small population.

Therefore there are enough tools of war for a troop or a battalion, but the people have no use for them.

So the people mind death and refrain from migrating to distant places.

Even though there are boats and carriages, they do not ride them; even though there are weapons and armor, they do not carry and wear them.

The people return to the use of the knotting cords.

They find relish with their food, beauty with their clothing, peace with their houses, and merriment with their ways of living.

There is another country in the neighborhood.

The two countries are so close that they are within sight of each other and the crowing of cocks and barking of dogs in one place can be heard in the other.

Yet throughout their lives the two peoples do not travel to and fro.

A small country has fewer people.

Though there are machines that can work ten or hundred times faster than man,

they are not needed.

The people want to be buried home, not travel far.

Though they have boats and carriages, no one uses them.

Though they have armor and weapons, no one displays them.

Men return to the knotting of rope in place of writing.

Their food is good, their clothes fine, their homes secure;

they are happy in their traditions.

Though they live within sight of their neighbors,

and crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard across the way,

they will not engage (visit) each other in their entire life.

In a small country with few people:

Though there are machines that would increase

production ten to a hundred miles

they are not used.

The people take death seriously and do not

travel about.

Though
they have boats and carriages no one uses them.

Though they have armor and weapons,

there is no occasion to display them.

The
people give up writing

and return to the knotting of cords.

They are satisfied with their food.

They are pleased with their clothes.

They are content with their homes.

They are happy in their simple ways.

Even
though they live within sight of another country

and can hear dogs barking and cocks crowing in it,

still the people grow old and die

without ever coming into conflict.

A
small land

with small groups of people

using horses instead of cars

plows instead of tractors,

themselves and their families attached,

dying on the land rather than leave it.

Ships never boarded, airplanes never sat in,

missiles never aimed, guns never loaded.

Ribbons
around fingers to remind us

instead of newspapers

simple talk

simple food

simple clothing

simple fireplace

simple work

Imagine
growing up and dying

hearing the neighbors' dogs and chickens and cows

but never

having been

there.

Let there be a small country with few people. Let there be ten times and a hundred
times as many utensils and let them not be used.

Let there be contrivances requiring ten times, a hundred times less labour;
they should not use them.

Let the people value their lives highly and not travel far. Bring it about that
the people are quite ready to lay down their lives at times to defend their
homes rather than emigrate.

As for ships and carriages, let there be none to ride.

There can still be weapons, but no one to drill seriously with them and none
to display them often.

People should have no use for any form of writing save knotted ropes: Let the
people again knot cords for reckoning.

Let them be very pleased with their food, beautify their clothing, be content
with their homes, take pleasure in rustic tasks, and delight in such customs
[just like Negroes].

The neighbouring place can be overlooked, can be so near that one may hear the
cocks crowing in it, the dogs barking; but the people would grow old and die
without ever having been there.

and never outside their country.

Let there be a small state with few people,

where military devices find no use;

Let the people look solemnly upon death,

and banish the thought of moving elsewhere.

They may have carts and boats,

but there is no reason to ride them;

They may have armor and weapons,

but they have no reason to display them.

Let the people go back to tying knots to keep records.

Let

their food be savory,

their clothes beautiful,

their customs pleasurable,

their dwellings secure.

Though they may gaze across at a neighboring state, and hear the sounds of its dogs and chickens,

The people will never travel back and forth, till they die of old age.

If I had a small kingdom and but ten or a hundred men of ability, I would not administrate with them.

I would teach the people to look upon death as a grievous thing, and then they would not go abroad to meet it.

Though they had boats and carriages, yet they would not go away in them.

Though they had armour, yet they would never have occasion to wear it.

The people would return to the use of the quipu.

They should find their coarse food sweet, think their plain clothes grand, regard their homes as places of rest, and take delight in their own simple pleasures.

Though the neighbouring state could be seen by us, and the crowing of the cocks and the barking of the dogs could be heard,

Yet my people would grow old, and die before ever feeling the need of having intercourse with it.

It Is Very Good

Your life together produces

great blessing and contentment.

You are busy enough with work to be satisfied

but have ample time to play.

Your financial needs are modest

for you need very little to be very happy.

Your spirits are fed

by the quiet and solitude you allow each other.

Your bodies merge in the pleasures of love.

You share food and song,

work and play,

sorrow and joy,

all without fear.

And when you come to die you think,

"It was good, is good, and will always be good."

Contentment in your relationship

is not a naive expectation.

The ups and downs of life

and the swing of changing moods

do not have to destroy you.

Can you see the happiness

that lies within your reach?

Let there be a small country with few people. Let there be ten times
and a hundred times as many utensils. But let them not be used. Let the
people value their lives highly and not migrate far.

Even if there are ships and carriages, none will ride in them. Even if there are arrows and weapons, none will display them.

Let the people again knot cords and use them (in place of writing).
Let them relish their food, beautify their clothing, be content with
their homes, and delight in their customs.

Though neighbouring communities overlook one another and the crowing
of cocks and the barking of dogs can be heard, Yet the people there may
grow old and die without ever visiting one another.

If a land is
small and its people are few,

With tenfold enough to have and to do,

And if no one has schooled them to waste supply

In the country for which they live and would die,

Then not a boat, not a cart

Tempts this people to depart,

Not a dagger, not a bow

Has to be drawn or bent for show,

People reckon by knots in a cord,

Relish plain food on the board,

Simple clothing suits them well,

And they remain content to dwell

In homes their customs can afford.

Though so close to their own town another town grow

They can hear its dogs bark and its roosters crow,

Yet glad of life in the village they know,

Where else in the world shall they need to go?

The most ideal country has little land and few people;

The people have many technologies but do not use them;

They are afraid of death and do not migrate far.

Even though they have boats and carriages, they do not use them;

Even though they have weapons and soldiers, they do not fight battles.

People go back to the ancient ways of life.

They enjoy their own food, admire their own clothes,

Appreciate their own peaceful lives, and love their own traditions.

Even if the people can see neighboring countries and hear the sounds of their cocks and dogs,

Up to their deaths, they never go there.

Let there be small countries with few people.

Let the people take the matter of life and death seriously,

And let them not move too far from their birthplaces.

Even if there are complicated devices,

Let there be no necessity to use them.

Even if there are boats and carriages,

Let there be no reason to ride them.

Even if there are armors and weapons,

Let there be no occasion to display them.

Let the life be so simple that

The people return to tying knots for keeping records.

Let them be delighted with plain food, pleased with simple clothes, satisfied with modest homes, joyous with natural customs.

Though they may gaze across at a neighboring country,

hearing the barking of its dogs and crowing of its roosters,

they are so happy and satisfied where they are

that they will not visit one another until the end of their days.

The wise person reduces the importance of governments

And simplifies the modes of living,

So that people use fewer tools and wares

And treasure simplicity in their lives,

So that, though there are vehicles,

People do not take them.

And, though there are weapons,

People do not carry them.

And, though there are records,

Tying knots will serve the record-keeping purpose.

Thus, the highest political achievement is one

In which people savor their food,

Like the beauty of their clothes,

Appreciate their safe and peaceful homes,

Enjoy their social customs;

And in which roosters and dogs

Can be heard between countries;

But people, all their lives,

Have no need to go across the borders.

I see a small country of small population.

A simple folk, who even if highly skilled work simply and easily.

Tools are seldom used. They do not bother to invent time-saving appliances.

They would dearly love life, and would take care to avoid death.

Since they would love their homes and land, they would not care to wander.

Even with their horses, boats and carts, they do not wish to travel about.

Though they may have armor and weapons, these are kept out of sight.

These people would return to simple techniques for record keeping.

Their food would be tasty but simple; their clothing would be unpretentious.

They would be content with their simple homes, and the simple pleasures and customs of a simple people.

And even though there might be a neighboring land within sight,

so that the crowing of roosters and the barking of dogs can be heard from it;

these people will have lived their entire life without ever having gone to that country.

