===== Chapter 56 =====

Those who know do not speak.

Those who speak do not know.

Blunt the sharpness

Untie the knots

Harmonize the lights

Equate the dust—

This is called "Mystic Similitude."

Therefore:

It is not able to be obtained, yet it is near.

It is not able to be obtained, and it is distant.

It is not able to be obtained, yet it benefits.

It is not able to be obtained, yet it harms.

It is not able to be obtained, yet it is valuable.

It is not able to be obtained, yet it is worthless.

Therefore, [it] become[s] for the world what is precious.

Those who know don't talk. Those who talk don't know.

Block the passage Bolt the gate Blunt the sharp Untie the knot Blend
with the light Become one with the dust - This is called original unity.

It can't be embraced It can't be escaped, It can't be helped It can't be
harmed, It can't be exalted It can't be despised, Therefore it is
revered under Heaven.

Those who know do not speak.

Those who speak do not know.

Close the passageways,

Lock the entryways,

Blunt the sharp edges,

Untangle the knots,

Dim the bright light,

Unite earthly dust.

This is called

The secret unity.

Then there will be no way to like you

And no way to dislike you.

There'll be no way to assist you

And no way to harm you.

There'll be no way to honor you

And no way to shame you.

You'll then obtain the highest prize in the world.

PRIMAL AND MYSTICAL UNITY

Knowing - thus, not talking.

Talking - thus, not knowing.

- Quieting speech.

- Subduing sensations.

- Dulling sharpness.

- Releasing entanglements.

- Diffusing brightness.

- Uniting with the dust of the earth.

This is the primal and mystical unity.

Possessing this unity, the Sage:

Makes no friends or enemies -

Is moved by neither love nor hate -

Is unaffected by profit or loss,

By neither honor nor disgrace.

Thus he attains the highest of human states.

One who knows, does not speak.

One who speaks, does not know.

Shut your mouth.

Close your gates.

Blunt your sharpness.

Unravel your tangles.

Harmonize your brilliance.

Join with your dust.

This is called the mystery of the One (the Source).

You will not be possessed by love.

You will not be possessed by hate.

You will not be possessed by profit.

You will not be possessed by loss.

You will not be possessed by honor.

You will not be possessed by disgrace.

This makes Heaven below (the sacred body) a treasure.

THE EXCELLENCE OF THE MYSTERY

Who knoweth the Tao keepeth Silence; he who babbleth knoweth it not.

Who
knoweth it closeth his mouth and controlleth the Gates of his Breath.

He will make his sharpness blunt; he will loosen his complexes; he will

tone down his brightness to the general obscurity. This is called the

Secret of Harmony.

He
cannot be insulted either by familiarity or aversion; he is immune to

ideas of gain or loss, of honour or disgrace; he is the true man,

unequalled under Heaven.

He who knows (the Tao) does not (care to) speak (about it); he whois (ever ready to) speak about it does not know it. He (who knows it) willkeep his mouth shut and close the portals (of his nostrils). He will blunthis sharp points and unravel the complications of things; he will temperhis brightness, and bring himself into agreement with the obscurity (ofothers). This is called 'the Mysterious Agreement.' (Such an one) cannotbe treated familiarly of distantly; he is beyond all consideration of profitor injury; of nobility or meanness:-he is the noblest man under heaven.

Those who have experienced the Mystery don't speak about it

Those who do speak about it have not experienced the Mystery

Don't try to speak about the Unspeakable

That which cannot be seen, heard, felt or tasted

The shapes fade

The edges weaken

Confusion disappears

The light brightens

The unrest is extinguished

That's what they call a "Mystical Experience"

Neither affection nor hate can move him

Profit nor loss will touch him

Honour nor disgrace will harm him

Therefore he is the world's noblest man

He who is wise keeps silent. He who advises is a fool.

The wise man shuts his mouth, Closes his doors, Curbs his anxieties, Withdraws from entanglements, Remains untempted by attractions, And retains his self-sufficiency.

Nature is profoundly impartial. It cannot be persuaded by pampering, Nor dissuaded by scoffing. It cannot be tempted by bribes, Nor influenced by injury. It cannot be cajoled by flattery, Nor chagrined by slander. Thus it is the most reliable thing in the world.

Those who know do not speak;

Those who speak do not know.

Black the passages,

Shut the doors,

Let all sharpness be blunted,

All tangles untied,

All glare tempered.

All dust smoothed.

This is called the mysterious leveling.

He who has achieved it cannot either be drawn into friendship or repelled,

Cannot be benefited, cannot be harmed,

Cannot either be raised or humbled,

And for that very reason is highest of all creatures under heaven.

One who knows does not talk about it.

One who talks about it does not know.

Stay quiet.

Keep inside.

Blunt sharpness.

Unravel entanglements.

Diffuse brightness.

Merge with dust.

This is called "discovering original nature."

One who knows original nature is

indifferent to intimacy and estrangement,

unconcerned with benefit and harm,

immune to honor and disgrace.

He is embraced by heaven.

To know does not mean to speak

To speak does not mean to know

Close the passages

Secure the gates

Blunt the sharpness

Resolve the tangles

Shade the glare

Be one with the world

This may be called "mystic union"

Such as may not be gained by affection

May not be gained by detachment

May not be gained by favor

May not be gained by suffering

May not be gained by esteem

May not be gained by humility

And so becomes precious to (all) under heaven

Impartiality

Those who know do not talk about it.

Those who talk do not know about it.

He blocks up his holes,

Closes his doors,

Softens the glare,

Settles the dust,

Files down the sharp edges,

And unties the tangles.

This is called the profound union.

Therefore, there is no way

To get intimate with him.

There is no way to benefit him,

But there is also no way to harm him.

There is no way to ennoble him.

But there is also no way to debase him

For this reason he is the noblest thing in the world.

Those who know don't talk. Those who talk don't know.

Close your mouth. Block the door. Quiet your senses. Blunt the sharpness. Untie the tangles. Soften the brightness. Be one with the dust, and enter the primal oneness.

One who has merged with Tao in this way can't be courted, can't be bought, can't be harmed, can't be honoured, can't be humiliated. He is the treasure of the world.

Understanding doesn't talk a lot;

A lot of talk lacks understanding.

Can you be guided by silence?

Can you shut down your outer senses?

Can you blunt your jagged edges?

Can you let the inner knots unravel?

Can you let your brilliance be dimmed?

Can you merge with the dust of the earth?

This is called "harmonizing light and dark."

In this, you possess no one,

But are loved by many.

You are equally immune

To attraction and revulsion.

You are equally receptive

To profit and to loss.

You are unmoved by fame,

And yet you attract honor.

Because you make no claim,

You can be free of disgrace.

Thus are you lovingly received

Into the Heart of Nature,

Forever.

One of the wonders of this little book of poems is how Lao Tzu was able to hammer so lightly at the same themes, and with such delightful variation in expression, so that each repetition is fresh and uniquely nourishing. The themes here presented should be quite familiar by now to one who has read the poems in order to this point: the intrinsic value of dispersing excess in speech and action, the fulfillment that comes of dimming down the outer senses and turning within toward one's feeling nature, the deep love that is drawn to one who abandons claim and possession on others, and the natural grace that arises in one who is "unmoved by fame."

In many traditional renderings of this verse, it is presented as a teaching on sitting meditation: be quiet, close off your senses, be soft and still as you settle your inner dust. This is a very good approach, but perhaps only to half the poem, as it were. I have been guided to see this verse as Lao Tzu's teaching on living as meditation: how the inner values and practices that we usually think of as meditation (sitting down and being open, still and silent) can become a way of life. After all, meditation that is not continued into life has nothing of value over an afternoon nap.

I think that Lao Tzu would like us to learn to disperse the division between the practice of meditation and the activity of daily living. Meditation is not properly a means of escape or relaxation from the rat race beyond the chair or cushion; it is meant to be what infuses the relationships and activities of every waking moment. When the way we do our work, raise our children, manage our homes, and interact socially becomes increasingly indistinguishable from the way we meditate, then the lesson of this poem will have been fully integrated into our lives. For this is where meditation takes us beyond the enrichment of life in a bodily form, and into the realm of true immortality, where "you are lovingly received into the Heart of Nature forever." As the division between inner and outer, between meditation and living, is dissolved, so is that between form and non-form, until the empty falsehood of death-as-ending is finally discarded. What then remains is all we need: life beyond time, perpetuated in consciousness.

Whoever knows does not speak;

whoever speaks does not know.

So,
stop the senses.

Close their doors.

Solve their riddles.

Subdue their light.

Be one with humble dust.

This
is the mystic unity.

It
is beyond love and hate,

beyond profit and loss,

beyond honor and dishonor.

Thus it is the most valuable treasure

in all the world.

Who knows does not speak; who speaks does not know.

Close the doors of the senses; blunt the sharp; unravel the confused; harmonize the dazzling; become one with the all. This is the Mystery of Unity. There will then neither be love nor hate; profit not loss; favour or disgrace. It follows that in the universe there is nothing nobler.

Blunt all that is sharp;

Cut all that is divisible;

Blur all that which is brilliant;

Mix with all that is humble as dust;

This is called absolute equality.

Therefore it cannot be made intimate;

Nor can it be alienated.

It cannot be benefited;

Nor can it be harmed.

It cannot be exalted;

Nor can it be debased.

Therefore it is the most valuable thing in the world.

Abstruse Virtuosity

Those who know to act do not speak.

Those who speak, do not know to act.

Shut up its exchanges,

close its gates.

Dull its sharpness,

undo its divisions.

Balance its brightness,

treat its particles as identical.

This is called the abstruse identity.

Hence we cannot obtain and be close.

Cannot obtain and be distant.

Cannot obtain and benefit.

Cannot obtain and harm.

Cannot obtain and value.

Cannot obtain and debase.

Hence we deem the social world as valuable.

One who is aware does not talk.

One who talks is not aware.

Ceasing verbal expressions,

Stopping the entry of sensations,

Dulling its sharpness,

Releasing its entanglements,

Tempering its brightness,

And unifying with the earth:

This is called the identity of Tao.

Hence, no nearness can reach him nor distance affect him.

No gain can touch him nor loss disturb him.

No esteem can move him nor shame distress him.

Thus, he is the most valuable man in the world.

One who knows does not speak.

One who speaks does not know.

He closes his mouth, seals his ears.

He subdues his sharpness, releases his worries.

He blends himself with the light, he becomes one with the dust.

This is what is called mysterious identity.

Therefore he regards things out of his reach as dear.

He regards things out of his reach as distant,

he perceives unreachable things with harm,

he perceives unreachable things with value,

he perceives unreachable things with humbleness.

That is why he values everything under Heaven.

He who knows does not speak;

He who speaks does not know.

Stop your hole,

Close your door,

Soften your brightness,

Mingle with the dust,

File your sharpness,

And unravel your entanglements.

This is called deep and remote concord.

Therefore, neither can anyone become intimate with you,

Nor can anyone become alienated from you;

Neither can anyone benefit you,

Nor can anyone harm you;

Neither can anyone exalt you,

Nor can anyone debase you.

Therefore, you are exalted by all under heaven.

The person who is blessed with great virtue can be compared to a child.

He will not be bitten by an insect or a snake,

He will not be devoured by wild animals,

Birds of prey will not swoop down on him.

His bones are fragile, his tendons soft, but his grip is strong.

He is not familiar with the union of man and woman, but he possesses reproductive powers.

This means that he is at the peak of his vitality.

He can weep all day and not become hoarse.

This means that he is in perfect harmony.

Being familiar with this harmony brings him closer to eternity,

Being familiar with eternity enables man to attain enlightenment.

Increasing life invites trouble,

Let your heart become addicted to the breath of the spirit, and you will be filled with potency.

One who knows does not speak;

One who speaks does not know.

Block
the openings;

Shut the doors.

Blunt the sharpness;

Untangle the knots;

Soften the glare;

Let your wheels move only along old ruts.

This
is known as mysterious sameness.

Hence
you cannot get close to it, nor can you keep it at arm's length;

You cannot bestow benefit on it, nor can you do it harm;

You cannot ennoble it, nor can you debase it.

Therefore
it is valued by the empire.

The Virtue of the Mysterious

One who knows does not talk. One who talks does not know. Therefore the sage keeps his mouth shut and his sense-gates closed.

"He will blunt his own sharpness, His own tangles adjust; He will dim his own radiance, And be one with his dust."

This is called profound identification.

Thus he is inaccessible to love and also inaccessible to enmity. He is inaccessible to profit and inaccessible to loss. He is also inaccessible to favor and inaccessible to disgrace. Thus he becomes world-honored.

If you know, you don't talk. If you talk, you don't know. Don't speak of the Tao. Don't indulge your senses. Don't be arrogant. Drop all beliefs. Lose self-importance. Dismiss all knowledge. Here you reach non-duality. Once enlightened, you have no friends or enemies. You cannot be rewarded or punished. You cannot be honoured or disgraced. Detached from self, you can be called a real human.

One who knows is reticent; one who glibs is ignorant.

Stuff channels, block portals;

blunt sharpness, resolve conflicts;

harmonize brightness, mingle with dust.

This is the Profoundest Assimilation.

Thus, after gaining possession,

one does not patronize, nor slight, nor take advantage of, nor damage, nor treasure, nor debase.

Thus, one is treasured by the world.

Those who know don't talk, and those who talk don't know.

Block the senses and close the mind,

blunt edges, loosen tangles, soften glare, mingle dust:

this is called dark-enigma union.

It can't be embraced and can't be ignored,

can't be enhanced and can't be harmed,

can't be treasured and can't be despised,

for it's the treasure of all beneath heaven.

He who knows the truth does not brag,

He who brags does not know the truth.

Closing the apertures, Shutting the doors,

Blunting the sharpness, Resolving inner conflicts,

Softening brightness, and

Harmonizing with the dusty world,

He is then in profound harmony with Tao.

Thus he is no longer:

Affected by being close to, or

Bothered by being distant from others;

Touched by gains, or

Influenced by losses

Tempted by nobleness, or

Shamed by lowliness.

Therefore he is respected by the world.

Those
who know are without words

Those with words are without knowing.

Corking
its bottle

Obstructing its door

Blunting its sharpness

Untying its tangles

Harmonizing its brightness

Being together with the dusty earth

Appropriately called insightful togetherness.

So
one cannot obtain it yet be attached

One cannot obtain it yet be detached

One cannot obtain it yet benefit

One cannot obtain it yet be harmed

One cannot obtain it yet treasure

One cannot obtain it yet consider as common.

So
it acts as the treasure of the world.

He who knows (the Principle), does not speak.

He keeps his mouth closed, controls his breathing, blunts his activity, rescues himself from any complication, tempers his light, And mingles with people. This is mysterious union (with the Principle).

No one can attach himself (by doing favours) to such a man, nor repulse him (by treating him badly). He is indifferent to gain or loss, exaltation or humiliation. Being thus, he is the most noble in the world.

Those who know do not talk

Those who talk do not know

Close the mouth

Shut the doors

Blunt the sharpness

Unravel the knots

Dim the glare

Mix the dust

This is called mystic oneness

They cannot obtain this and be closer

They cannot obtain this and be distant

They cannot obtain this and be benefited

They cannot obtain this and be harmed

They cannot obtain this and be valued

They cannot obtain this and be degraded

Therefore, they become honored by the world

The truly wise understand the Tao, so they know that actions speak louder than words. Rather than to talk endlessly about what they should do or how they should be, they put their time and effort into the actual doing and being.

On the other hand, those who prattle on and on only demonstrate that they know little about the Tao. They spend so much time talking about what they think they know that they end up not putting any of it into actual practice. Without real-life applications, the Tao means nothing.

Tao cultivators close openings and doors - the passages that lead to, or allow in, the many temptations and distractions of the material world. They realize that the sensory thrills of such distractions are short-lived and ultimately illusory, so they prefer to stick to the real and practical.

When interacting with others, they are gentle and compassionate, because caustic and abrasive words can form a sharp edge that hurts people. Their gentle approach unravels the complexities of personal interactions, so they can enjoy a simple, direct connection with fellow human beings that is mutually enriching.

They are also humble and full of self-effacing humor, because those who like to show off their mental brilliance end up alienating people with the blinding glare of their arrogance.

True Tao cultivators do not try to set themselves apart from the rest of humanity. They do not go into hermitage far away from civilization. Instead, they are fully immersed in the dust of the material world where they can really put their spiritual cultivation to the test.

All of the above are aspects of what we call "Mystic Oneness." It is a crucial element in any spiritual path.

Those who achieve true understanding of Mystic Oneness (whether they call it by that name or not) are the ones who can be fully involved with life in the material world... and yet transcend beyond it. One cannot influence them by getting close to them or treating them in a cold and distant manner. They are unmoved by the promise of benefits or threats of injury. It is equally useless to flatter them, feed their ego, or attempt to pummel them into submission by degrading or condemning them.

Such people are truly exceptional, and that is why they will invariably become honored by the entire world.

Notes

If the above descriptions are too vague or abstract, think of Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, and the Dalai Lama. These are concrete, real-life examples of human beings who have attained the level of Mystic Oneness. Read the interpretation above with these exceptional individuals in mind, and you will find that this chapter is an incredibly accurate and exact description of their true character.

THE TEH OF THE MYSTERIOUS

The one who knows does not speak; the one who speaks does not know. The wise man shuts his mouth and closes his gates. He softens his sharpness, unravels his tangles, dims his brilliancy, and reckons himself with the mysterious.

He is inaccessible to favor or hate; he cannot be reached by profit or injury; he cannot be honored or humiliated. Thereby he is honored by all.

One who knows does not speak,

One who speaks does not know.

Stop the apertures,

Close the door;

Blunt the sharp,

Untie the entangled;

Harmonize the bright,

Make identical the dust.

This is called the mystical identity (hsüan t'ung).

Therefore with this person you cannot get intimate (ch'in),

Cannot get distant,

Cannot benefit,

Cannot harm,

Cannot exalt,

Cannot humiliate.

Therefore such person is the exalted of the world.

Whoever knows does not speak; whoever speaks does not know. So, stop the senses. Close their doors. Ignore their riddles. Subdue their light. Be one with humble dust. This is the mystic unity.

It is beyond love and hate, beyond profit and loss, beyond honor and dishonor. Thus, it is the most valuable treasure in all the world.

Those who know do not tell. Those who tell do not know.

Stop talking, withdraw from the rat–race, calm your spirit,

untangle yourself, soften your glare.

Be one with the dust of the earth.

This is primal union.

Achieving union with the Tao places one beyond

attraction and repulsion, benefit and harm, honor and disgrace.

This is the highest state of being.

Fifty-six

Those who know do not talk.

Those who talk do not know.

Keep your mouth closed.

Guard your senses.

Temper your sharpness.

Simplify your problems.

Mask your brightness.

Be at one with the dust of the Earth.

This is primal union.

He
who has achieved this state

Is unconcerned with friends and enemies,

With good and harm, with honor and disgrace.

This therefore is the highest state of man.

He who is wise will not speak;

He who speaks is not wise.

When one blocks the openings (of knowledge),

Shuts the door (of desires),

Dulls sharpness,

Stays away from entanglements,

Glows with veiled radiance,

Mingles with dust,

That is called subtle identification.

Hence you are in no way

To be friends with him,

To estrange him,

To benefit him,

To harm him,

To honor him,

To debase him.

That is why he is held in esteem in the world.

He who knows does not speak;

He who speaks does not know.

Block the holes,

Shut the gates.

[He] blunts the sharpness,

Unravels the tangles,

Softens the brilliance,

Identifies with the dust.

This is called mysterious identity.

Therefore you can neither befriend him,

Nor alienate him,

Nor benefit him,

Nor harm him,

Nor exalt him,

Nor humble him.

That is why he is the noblest of all under Heaven.

He who really knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

You must block the portals to your sensory organs.

You must also blunt the sharp edge and reduce the complexity.

You must attenuate the glares and mix with commoners.

This is to attain "the divine oneness".

Henceforth, you are not concerned about intimacy or estrangement.

You have no concerns about advantage and disadvantage.

You have no concerns about nobility and lowliness.

Everyone treasures you.

Mystic Virtue

Hsuan Teh

Those who know do not speak;

Those who speak do not know.

Stop up the aperture of the vessel,

Shut the doors of the senses,

Blunt the sharp,

Unravel the tangled,

Harmonize with the light,

Merge with the dust, -

This is called Mystic Assimilation.

Men with this attainment, therefore, are

Above endearment or estrangement,

Above enrichment or impoverishment,

And above exaltation or degradation.

Therefore they are highly honored by the world.

He who knows the Tao does not talk about it;

He who talks about the Tao does not know it.

He whose lips are closed,

Who has shut the doors of the senses,

Who tones down that which dazzles

And knows himself lowly as the dust -

Is it not he who has attained to perfect equanimity?

Such a one cannot be be encroached upon;

Nor can he be repelled;

He cannot be benefitted,

Nor can he be harmed;

He cannot be exalted,

Nor can he be cast down.

Is not this perfect equanimity the most valuab;e of all things under the sun?

He who speaks does not know.

He who knows does not speak.

Block the passages!

Shut the doors,

Blunt edges,

Untie tangles,

Harmonize lights,

Unite all dust.

Call this the original oneness.

It can't be had by courting,

Can't be had by shunning;

Can't be had by helping;

Can't be had by harming;

Can't be had by praising,

Can't be had by blaming:

For it is beneath-heaven's highest.

One who knows does not speak.

One who speaks does not know.

The one who knows is the one whose doors are shut, whose openings are blocked, whose sharpness is blunted, and whose glare is softened.

He is one with the subtle truth of the universe.

Thus you cannot get close to such a person by your love to do so,

nor can you keep away from him by your desire to do so.

You cannot bestow benefit on him,

nor can you do him harm,

because he holds the subtle essence of the universe.

LVI.

Profound
Virtue

They
who know speak not,

And
they who speak know not;

To
close the mouth and shut the gates,

To
blunt the point which lacerates,

To
simplify what complicates;

To
temper brightness in its glare,

The
shadows of the dust to share,

The
Deep s identity declare.

A man
like that cannot be got

And
loved, and then discarded be,

Cannot
be got by profit s bribe,

Cannot
be got for injury,

Cannot
be got by honor s gift,

Nor
got for cheap humility,

And
so becomes, throughout the world,

The
type of high nobility.

He who knows, speaks not;

He who speaks, knows not.

He closes the mouth,

He shuts the doors of the senses.

He rounds off angles;

He unravels all difficulties.

he harmonizes Light.

He brings men into Unity.

This is called wonderful Unity.

Favour and disgrace do not touch him,

profit and loss do not affect him,

Honour and shame are alike to him,

Therefore he is held in high esteem by all men.

They who know may not speak.

They who speak may not know.

Block all the passage ways!

( Be content with your position. )

Shut all the doors!

( Remove all distractions. )

Unsharpen all edges!

( Be kind not sharp in your dealings with life. )

Untie all knots!

(Understand the the root of all problems.)

Blend all lights!

( View all you see based on the Laws of the Universe.)

Bring the world together

into one completeness!

( Understand the oneness of the World. )

This is called

the Beyond Understanding Completeness,

Which you cannot attract

or push away,

Benefit or hurt,

Honor or reduce.

It is the Highest Truth of the world.

He stops his apertures, he closes his doors.

"He blunts his sharpness, he unravels tangles, he dims brightness, he levels tracks.

This is called the mystic equality.

For in getting him one cannot come close nor remain distant, one cannot profit by him nor be harmed by him, one cannot gain honour by him nor suffer disgrace by him.

Therefore he is the most prized in All-under-heaven.

He who knows (the Tao) does not (care to) speak (about it); he

who is (ever ready to) speak about it does not know it.

He
(who knows it) will keep his mouth shut and close the portals

(of his nostrils). He will blunt his sharp points and unravel the

complications of things; he will attemper his brightness, and bring

himself into agreement with the obscurity (of others). This is called

'the Mysterious Agreement.'

(Such
an one) cannot be treated familiarly or distantly; he is

beyond all consideration of profit or injury; of nobility or

meanness:--he is the noblest man under heaven.

One who knows does not label with words;
one who labels with words does
not really know.
ONE
WHO
quiets the portals of their heart,
stops beckoning from that door;

diffuses their light;
mingles with dust;
files away their sharp
edges and
unravels their tangles
HAS
"MYSTICAL SELF-IDENTITY."
Because
of it,
neither can one be fully 'intimate' with them
nor can one remain
distant from them;
neither can one profit from them
nor can one be harmed
by them;
neither can one achieve honor though them
nor can one be dishonored
through them.
Because
of this, they are esteemed by all under heaven.

Those
who know don't like to say

Those who say don't know

Close the mouth and guard the senses

You'll see more than what's on show

Untie
tangles, dim the glare

Dull the sharp and join the dust

Abide in primal unity

And then do what you must

You
cannot hold it or let go

It can't be blamed or praised

In all-embracing oneness

Be astonished and amazed

HE who knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

Block all the passages!

Shut all the doors!

Blunt all edges!

Untie all tangles!

Harmonize all lights!

Unite the world into one whole!

This is called the Mystical Whole,

Which you cannot court after nor shun,

Benefit nor harm, honour nor humble.

Therefore, it is the Highest of the world.

Those who know of the Way do not speak of it,

Those who speak of the Way do not know it.

Close your mouth, shut the doors of your desires,

blunt your sharpness, untie the tangles of your life,

dim your glare, quiet life's turmoil,

this is the Mystic Virtue.

Those achieving Mystic Virtue are not affronted or thrilled either by hate or love;

they are removed from benefit and harm; beyond care of praise or blame,

they are the true humans, unequaled under Heaven.

Those who know do not talk.

Those who talk do not know.

Stop
talking,

meditate in silence,

blunt your sharpness,

release your worries,

harmonize your inner light,

and become one with the dust.

Doing this is called the dark and mysterious identity.

Those
who have achieved the mysterious identity

can not be approached, and they can not be alienated.

They can not be benefited nor harmed.

They can not be made noble nor to suffer disgrace.

This makes them the most noble of all under the heavens.

The wise leader knows that the true nature of events cannot be captured in words. So why pretend?

Confusing jargon is one sure sign of a leader who does not know how things happen.

But what cannot be said can be demonstrated: be silent, be conscious. Consciousness works. It sheds light on what in happening. It clarifies conflicts and harmonizes the agitated individual or group field.

The leader also knows that all existence is a single whole. Therefore, the leader is a neutral observer who takes no sides.

The leader cannot be seduced by offers or threats. Money, love, or fame - whether gained or lost - do not sway the leader from center.

The leader's integrity is not idealistic. It rests on a pragmatic knowledge of how things work.

Those who know, do not speak.

Those who speak, do not know.

So shut your mouth

Guard your senses

Blunt your sharpness

Untangle your affairs

Soften your glare

Be one with All dust.

This is the mystery of union.

You cannot approach it Yet you cannot escape it.

You cannot benefit it

Yet you cannot harm it.

You cannot bestow any honor on it

Yet you cannot rob it of its dignity.

That is why the whole Universe reveres it.

Those
who know have no need to speak.

Those who speak are searching for peace and

harmony.

Do
not speak.

Ignore your senses.

Blunt your sharpness.

Unravel your knots.

Dim your light.

Become one with all things.

This is the primal essence.

Those
who flow in the peace and harmony of Infinity

make no distinctions.

They are therefore indifferent to friend and foe,

to good and bad, to honor and infamy.

This is the natural state of human beings.

He who knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

Complete the exchange, close the door.

Round the edges, end the separation,

merge with the light, join with the dust.

This is called Mystic Unity.

Therefore,

from then on, never need Temples,

from then on, never be dispersed,

from then on, never need money,

from then on, never be harmed,

from then on, never be Noble,

from then on, never be Humble.

And so be Exalted under Heaven.

He who knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

He closes the mouth

And shuts the doors;1

Blunts sharp edges,

Unties all tangles;

Softens the glare,

And blends with the dust.

This is called mystical union.

He who can attain this state2

Is not concerned with being liked or disliked,

Benefited or harmed,

Exalted or despised.

Thus he is valued by the world.

1. of the senses.

2. of being like a Sage.

One who knows says nothing.

One who says knows nothing.

Cover the ears, close the eyes;

Blunt the sharpness, dissolve the currents;

Soften the light, blend the substances.

And the result is called the profound sameness.

One who holds that sameness cannot be

Approached too close,

Or estranged too far,

Or favored too much,

Or harmed too badly,

Or valued too high,

Or degraded too low.

And is therefore the most appreciated in the world.

Those who understand are not talkers talkers don't understand.

Close your eyes shut your doors. Dampen the passion untie the tangles make the flashing things harmonious make the dust merge together. This is called the mysterious Merging.

Yes: You cannot get close you cannot stay away you cannot help It you cannot harm It you cannot treasure It you cannot look down on It. Yes: It is the Treasure of the World.

The truth cannot be conveyed only through words! He who does not understand this cannot understand fully this treatise!*

He who abandons personal desires, becomes free from worldly passions, reduces his needs, achieves clear understanding, does not aspire to glory, stays in subtle state of consciousness — such a person represents the Primordial and Deepest Tao.

He cannot be tempted, offended, forced, persuaded to be glorified. No one can harm him!

He shines like the sun! He is like a source that everyone can drink from!

He is the Highest Treasure among people!

* One can understand fully the truth only by realizing in practice everything that is described here.

The one who speaks doesn't know,

The one who doesn't speak knows.

By closing the eyes, not hearing, not smelling,

Not touching, nor tasting, the senses are closed.

But a world of harmony it is opened in the mind.

The
Wise Person is not concerned by friends,

enemies, glory or disgrace.

He reaches perfection by following the Tao Way.

Those
who know do not talk. Those who talk do not know. [So:] Stop up your orifices.
Close your doors. Blunt your sharpness. Release your tangles. Harmonize your
lights. Make same your dust. So doing is called the dark and mysterious identity.
Therefore [those who have attained to the mysterious identity] cannot be made
to be intimate, and they cannot be alienated. They cannot be benefited, and
they cannot be injured. They cannot be ennobled, and they cannot suffer degradation.
Therefore they are noble among all those in the world.

The one who knows does not speak.

The one who speaks does not know.

Block the passage.

Close the door.

Dull the sharpness.

Loosen the tangles.

Blend with light.

Become one with the dust.

This is called mystical identity.

Hence,

One can be neither close to it, nor far from it;

One can neither benefit it, nor harm it;

One can neither value it, nor despise it.

Therefore, it is valued by the world.

Gaining Oneness

Those who know do not speak.

Those who speak do not know.

Block the passages.

Close the door.

Blunt the sharpness.

Untie the tangles.

Harmonize the brightness.

Identify wtih the ways of the world.

This is called Profound Identification.

It cannot be gained through attachment.

It cannot be gained through detachment.

It cannot be gained through advantage.

It cannot be gained through disadvantage.

It cannot be gained through esteem.

It cannot be gained through humility.

Hence it is the treasure of the world.

Say there are two sages in the village. One openly talking of knowledge and one in silent meditation. The loud one talks to preach his understanding of the Dao. The quiet one does not question it and is content. For he knows all there is to know of the Dao.

Those who know do not talk

And talkers do not know.

Stop
your senses,

Close the doors;

Let sharp things be blunted,

Tangles resolved,

The light tempered

And turmoil subdued;

For this is mystic unity

In which the Wise Man is moved

Neither by affection

Nor yet by estrangement

Or profit or loss

Or honor or shame.

Accordingly, by all the world,

He is held highest.

He who knows does not speak,

And he who speaks does not know.

Blocking the vent (of knowledge), closing the door (of knowledge), covering the cutting-edge, going beyond entanglement, containing the light, and mixing with the dust,

- These can be called "the mysterious agreement."

So, (the person with "the mysterious agreement")

Cannot be treated intimately,

Cannot be estranged,

Cannot be given profits,

Cannot be injured,

Cannot be raised to nobility,

And cannot be made humble,

And can therefore be esteemed by all the people under Heaven.

He who knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

Block up your apertures;

Close your door;

Blunt your sharpness;

Cut away the tangled;

Merge with the brilliant;

Become one with the very dust.

We call this "one with mystery."

Thus one can neither get close to such a one nor get distant from him.

One can neither benefit nor harm him.

One can neither ennoble him nor debase him.

Thus such a one is esteemed by all under Heaven.

1. Those who know don't talk about it; those who talk don't know it.

2.
He blocks up his holes,

3. Closes his doors,

4. Softens the glare,

5. Settles the dust,

6. Files down the sharp edges,

7. And unties the tangles.

8. This is called Profound Union.

9.
Therefore, there is no way to get intimate with him,

10. But there is also no way to shun him.

11. There is no way to benefit him,

12. But there is also no way to harm him.

13. There is no way to ennoble him,

14. But there is also no way to debase him.

15. For this very reason he's the noblest thing in the world.

Those who know,
don't talk.

Those who talk, don't know.

Shut your mouth.

Be still. Relax.

Let go of your worries.

Stay out of the spotlight.

Be at one with the world

and get right with Tao.

If you get right
with Tao,

you won't be worried

about praise or scorn,

about winning or losing,

about honor or disgrace.

That's the way to be.

.

Mystical Unity

Those who know do not speak.

Those who speak do not know.

Close the mouth; shut the doors.

Smooth the sharpness; untie the tangles.

Dim the glare; calm the turmoil.

This is mystical unity.

Those achieving it are detached from friends and enemies,

from benefit and harm, from honor and disgrace.

Therefore they are the most valuable people in the world.

One who knows does not speak One who speaks does not know.

The Sage closes his sense-gates and keeps silent softens discord and solves confusion dims his light and is next to all.

Because he is one with all neither love nor hate can affect him neither profit nor loss neither honor nor disgrace.

That is his nobility.

The Noblest One

Lao Tze says,

He who knows the Tao does not care to speak about it;

he who is ever ready to speak about it does not know it.

Therefore the Tao practician would rather close his eyes and shut up his mouth, in order to frustrate his ambition and untie the confused knot in his heart.

Further, he proceeds to temper his brightness, and brings himself into agreement with obscurity.

Then he deserves to be called the one in accordance with Heaven.

Such a one cannot be treated familiarly nor distantly, rendered with profit or injury, made noble or mean.

Hence he is regarded as the noblest one in the world.

VIRTUOUS PASSIVITY

Those
who know the natural way

have no need of boasting,

whilst those who know but little,

may be heard most frequently;

thus, the sage says little,

if anything at all.

Not
demanding stimuli,

he tempers his sharpness well,

reduces the complex to simplicity,

hiding his brilliance, seemingly dull;

he settles the dust,

whilst in union with all natural things.

He
who has attained enlightenment

(without contriving so to do)

is not concerned with making friends,

nor with making enemies;

with good or harm, with praise or blame.

Such detatchment is the highest state of man.

Those who know don't talk.

Those who talk don't know.

Close your mouth,

block off your senses,

blunt your sharpness,

untie your knots,

soften your glare,

settle your dust.

This is the primal identity.

Be like the Tao.

It can't be approached or withdrawn from,

benefited or harmed,

honored or brought into disgrace.

It gives itself up continually.

That is why it endures.

One who knows may not preach.

One who preaches may not know.

Close the entrances to attractions and control the excess of desires.

It blunts all sharpness.

It settles all disputes.

It harmonizes all lights.

It unites all lands.

They are the "Profound Similarities" of Dao.

Thus,

It cannot be involved, nor can it be ignored.

It cannot be utilized, nor can it be harmed.

It cannot be honored, nor can it be disgraced.

Thus, it is cherished by all things under the heaven.

Those who know, do not say.

Those who say, do not know.

Close the mouth.

Shut the door.

Merge into light.

As ordinary as dust.

Blunt the sharpness.

Unravel the entanglements.

This is called mysterious sameness.

You are not intimate by acquiring it;

You are not distant in not acquiring it.

You do not profit by acquiring it;

You do not lose it by not acquiring it.

You are not ennobled by acquiring it;

You are not disgraced by not acquiring it.

This enables the nobility of the world.

LVI

How
can you speak of things that go beyond words?

The wise know when not to talk

They
blocks up their holes

Close their doors

Soften their light

Settle their dust

Blunt their rough edges

Untie their knots

This
is oneness

Whoever achieves it

Can never be known intimately but will never be shunned

Can never be benefited but will never be harmed

Those Who Know Do Not Say

Those who know do not say;

those who say do not know.

Close the senses,

shut the doors;

blunt the sharpness,

resolve the complications;

harmonize the light,

assimilate to the world.

This is called mysterious sameness.

It cannot be made familiar,

yet cannot be estranged;

it cannot be profited,

yet cannot be harmed;

it cannot be valued,

yet cannot be demeaned.

Therefore it is precious for the world.

Knowledgeable people rarely show off.

Boastful people are not truly knowledgeable.

Block up leakages;

Close doors;

Smooth out sharp edges;

Resolve conflicts;

Harmonize glares;

And blend into the base.

These are profound concords.

Do not become intimate when receiving the desired.

Do not become alienating when receiving the undesired.

Do not become greedy when obtaining profit.

Do not retaliate when receiving hostility.

Do not prize when obtaining the precious.

Do not debase when receiving humility.

Doing so can gain respect from others.

He who knows does not speak.

He who speaks does not know.

Blocking all the passages; shutting all the doors, blunting all edges, untying all tangles, harmonizing all lights, uniting the worldly dusts.

This is called the mysterious One.

Hence, you cannot have it by nearness, by distance, by benefit, by harm, by praise, by dislike.

Therefore, it is the most prized of the world.

Those who know do not chat.

Those who chat do not know.

Plug the openings, close the gate.

Temper the sharpness, eliminate the division.

Soften the brightness, be the same as the dust (as lowly as possible).

This is the Primal Union.

Thus, friends, enemies, good, harm, honor and disgrace are all with you.

The world will honor you.

Those who know do not speak.

Those who speak do not know.

Block
the passages!

Shut the doors!

Blunt the sharpness!

Untangle the knots!

Soften the glare!

Settle with the dust!

This is the Mystery of Evenness.

Those
who have achieved this cannot be enclosed

nor kept at a distance;

they cannot be bene fited nor harmed,

honored nor disgraced.

Therefore,
this is the noblest state under heaven.

A
person who knows the way

has no need or desire to talk about it.

People who talk about it

really don't know the way.

The atheist who knows atheism does not talk,

and those who talk about it don't know it.

Quit
talking about

quit searching

quit your logic

quit trying to win

quit trying to impress

get down to the very basics

of existence.

This is the mystic way to understanding.

Then
there are no friends or enemies,

no benefits, no disgrace

no rewards, no losses.

This is human being

simply

being.

He who knows doesn't speak (artfully). He who speaks hardly knows.

Fill
your openings, shut the doors,

Dull all nasty edges. Untie all tangles.

Temper or soften all glaring light.

Submerge its turmoil as unified with the world: Let all chaotic hustle and bustle
be smoothed down.

This is the called the mysterious [Vossing] levelling for bland unity or deep
insider identification.

Love
and hatred can barely affect the gods and supermen who are said to have achieved
it.

Certain forms of loss can hardly reach up to this.

It can be hard to repel and shoo such an accomplished god-being, as it's impossible
to be distant and indifferent to him.

He can't be raised, can't be much humbled, and disgrace can hardly affect him
deep inside.

So he is already highest of all humbled creatures. He is to be so honoured by
the world.

One who knows does not speak;

One who speaks does not know.

He

Stopples the openings of his heart,

Closes his doors,

Diffuses the light,

Mingles with the dust,

Files away his sharp points,

Unravels his tangles.

This is called "mysterious identity."

Therefore,

Neither can one attain intimacy with him,

Nor can one remain distant from him;

Neither can one profit from him,

Nor can one be harmed by him;

Neither can one achieve honor through him,

Nor can one be debased by him.

Therefore,

He is esteemed by all under heaven.

He who knows the Tao does not discuss it, and those who babble about it do not know it.

To keep the lips closed, to shut the doors of sight and sound, to smooth off the corners, to temper the glare, and to be on a level with the dust of the earth, this is the mysterious virtue.

Whoever observes this will regard alike both frankness and reserve, kindness and injury, honour and degradation.

For this reason he will be held in great esteem of all men.

Without Talking

Those who live continually in love,

seldom talk about it.

It exists outside your

words,

thoughts,

feelings,

and senses.

Yet fills up all that you are.

Too much talking hinders

your ability to hear it.

Spend a whole day with your beloved

without talking.

Do not read, listen to radio or watch television.

Just be with each other and notice how you feel,

even when it seems strange.

Discover who you are

without all of these things.

Express your essence to each other

wordlessly.

He who knows does not speak. He who speaks does not know.

Close the mouth. Shut the doors. Blunt the sharpness. Untie the
tangles. Soften the light. Become one with the dusty world. This is
called the profound identification.

Therefore it is impossible either to be intimate and close to him or
to be distant and indifferent to him. It is impossible either to benefit
him or to harm him. It is impossible either to honour him or disgrace
him. For this reason he is honoured by the world.

Those who know
do not tell,

Those who tell do not know.

Not to set the tongue loose

But to curb it,

Not to have edges that catch

But to remain untangled,

Unblinded,

Unconfused,

Is to find balance,

And he who holds baiance beyond sway of love or hate,

Beyond reach of profit or loss,

Beyond care of praise or blame,

Has attained the highest post in the world.

People who have knowledge do not talk about it;

people who like to talk about it do not have knowledge.

Shut off your senses, block your desires,

Dull your sharpness, untie your knots with the outside world,

Dim your brightness, and make yourself as low as dust;

This will lead you to the world of the DAO.

Therefore, no one can own the DAO,

No one can cast it away,

No one can benefit it,

No one can hurt it,

No one can make it noble,

No one can make it low;

This is why the DAO is the noblest.

Those who know do not talk.

Those who talk do not know.

Close the openings of your senses,

Blunt the sharpness of your intellect,

Untie the tangles of your attachment,

Soften the brightness of your knowledge.

Be one with the dust of the world.

This is to be one with the Tao.

He who is one with the Tao cannot be courted, cannot be distanced, cannot be bought, cannot be harmed, cannot be honored, cannot be humiliated.

For this reason, he becomes the true treasure of the world.

One who knows says nothing.

One who says knows nothing.

Cover the ears, close the eyes;

Blunt the sharpness, dissolve the currents;

Soften the light, blend the substances.

And the result is called the profound sameness.

One who holds that sameness cannot be

Approached too close,

Or estranged too far,

Or favored too much,

Or harmed too badly,

Or valued too high,

Or degraded too low.

And is therefore the most appreciated in the world.

Those who know of the Way do not speak of it,

Those who speak of the Way do not know it.

Close your mouth, shut the doors of your desires,

blunt your sharpness, untie the tangles of your life,

dim your glare, quiet life's turmoil,

this is the Mystic Virtue.

Those achieving Mystic Virtue are not affronted or thrilled either by hate or love;

they are removed from benefit and harm; beyond care of praise or blame,

they are the true humans, unequaled under Heaven.

