===== Chapter 12 =====

The five colors make people's eyes blind.

The five tones make people's ears deaf.

The five flavors make people's mouths lose [their tasting ability].

Hurrying, rushing, hunting, and chasing

Make people's minds issue forth insanity.

Goods that are hard to get cause people's doings to harm.

Therefore, the sages

Act by the insides, not by the eyes.

Therefore, let go of that

And take up this.

Five colors darken the eyes. Five tones darken the ears. Five tastes jade the palate.

Hunting and racing madden the heart. Exotic goods ensnarl human lives.

Therefore the Sage Takes care of the belly, not the eye, Chooses one, rejects the other.

Too much color dazzles the eye.

Too much noise deafens the ear.

Too much flavor deadens the taste.

Excessive hunting disturbs the mind.

Excessive wealth disquiets the heart.

Therefore the sage trusts his instincts, not his eyes.

He heeds the former, ignores the latter.

SENSUOUS OVERLOAD

Altogether, the five colors -

Confuse, overwhelm and blind the eye.

Altogether, the five sounds -

Confuse, overwhelm and deafen the ear.

Altogether, the five flavors -

Confuse, overwhelm and dull the taste.

Compulsive activity or pursuit of possessions -

Confuses, overwhelms and maddens the mind.

Thus:

The Sage rejects the sensuous environment,

Being better guided by intuitive truth -

His inner nature.

The eyes can become blind to the five colors.

The ears can become deaf to the five notes.

The mouth can become dull to the five tastes.

Too much hunting in a field over excites the heart and mind.

Precious goods hinder one's activities.

The sages attend to their souls, not to what their eyes see.

They discard the latter and take hold of the former.

THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EXTERNAL

The five colors film over Sight; The five sounds make Hearing dull; The

five flavours conceal Taste; occupation with motion and action bedevil

Mind; even so the esteem of rare things begetteth covetousness and

disorder.

The
wise man seeketh therefore to content the actual needs of the

people; not to excite them by the sight of luxuries. He banneth these,

and concentrateth on those.

Fine colors blind eyes to true reality Fine Tones shut out the othersounds. Fine spices deaden the taste. Races and hunts disturb a gentlesoul. Gems and gold seduce the heart. The Sage follows not the eyes butthe soul, Not the senses but the essence.

All those artificial colours blind people's eyes

All that man-made music deafens people's ears

All those various flavours dull our taste

Horse races and hunting drive people crazy

The desire for scarce goods

Hinders people from going on the straight and simple path

Therefore the wise finds his satisfaction

In feeding himself and then he won't exhaust his eyes

Therefore he does this and leaves that

Interest in the varieties of colour diverts the eye from regarding the thing which is coloured. Attention to the differences between sounds distracts the ear from consideration for the source of the sounds. Desire for enjoyment of the various flavours misdirects the appetite from seeking foods which are truly nourishing.

Excessive devotion to chasing about and pursuing things agitates the mind with insane excitement. Greed for riches ensnares one's efforts to pursue his healthier motives.

The intelligent man is concerned about his genuine needs and avoids being confused by dazzling appearances. He wisely distinguishes one from the other.

The fives colours confuse the eye,

The fives sounds dull the ear,

The five tastes spoil the palate.

Excess of hunting and chasing

Makes minds go mad.

Products that are hard to get

Impede their owner's movements.

Therefore the Sage

Considers the belly not the eye.

Truly, "he rejects that but takes this".

The five colors confuse the eye.

The five tones deaden the ear.

The five flavors dull the palette.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Valuable goods hinder movement.

Therefore the sage is guided by his gut, not his senses.

He attends to one and ignores the other.

The five colors will make the human eye blind

The five tones will make the human ear deaf

The five flavors will make the human palate jaded

Racing for speed and hunting for sport

Will make the human heart go mad

Goods which are hard to obtain

Will bring human progress obstruction

This is why wise ones

Regard the belly instead of regarding the sight

And so dismiss That to choose This

Distraction

The five colors causes one's eyes to become blind.

Racing horses and hunting causes one's mind to go mad.

Goods that are hard to obtain, pose an obstacle to one's travels.

The five flavors confuses one's palate.

The five tones causes one's ears to go deaf.

Therefore, in the government of the sage:

He is for the belly and not for the eyes.

Thus he rejects that and takes this.

The five colors

green, red, yellow, white and black

The five flavors

sweet, bitter, salty, sour and pungent

The five tones

C, D, E, G and A

The five colours blind the eye. The five tones deafen the ear. The five flavours overwhelm the palate.

Fancy things get in the way of one's growth. Racing here and there, hunting for this and that - Good ways to madden your mind, that's all.

Relinquish what is without. Cultivate what is within. Live for your center, not your senses.

Rampant color impairs vision;

A profusion of sound obstructs the ear;

Gluttonous tastes poison the mouth;

Attachment to belief warps the self;

Predatory impulse reviles the treasure.

The Sage uses the outer to point to the inner;

By exposing the image, it shows us ourselves.

Self-display corrupts your ability to see within; making noise about yourself closes off your inner ear; the Tao itself cannot be tasted when one is obsessed with outer sensation. Lao Tzu never asks us to abandon the delights available to our outer senses; he simply asks us to place them in a more holistic context, one that allows equality to our inner senses. Indeed, once these inner senses are activated and trusted, they are discovered to deepen and enrich the experience of the outer senses. The same is true of belief and action: when we can consistently feel and sense beyond the level of the superficial, then our understanding becomes deeper and wider, and our action becomes naturally measured and penetrating. When the cursory images of attachment and gross sensation are exposed for what they are—a vain and ephemeral veneer of experience—then the true self, in all its depth and strength, arises without display, without vanity, without effort.

Five colors (blue, yellow, red, white, black)

blind the eye.

Five notes (do, re, mi, so, la)

deafen the ear.

Five tastes (sweet, sour, bitter, pungent, salt)

dull the tongue.

Hunting
and pursuing will unbalance the mind.

Striving for earthly goods produces unhealthy tension.

Therefore
the truly wise

satisfy the internal and reject the external.

They accept one and deny the other.

The five colours blind men's eyes.

The five tones deafen one's ears.

The five flavours blunt men's appetites.

Galloping and hunting derange men's minds.

Articles which are rare limit the freedom of men's actions.

On this account the holy man regards the stomach and not the eye.

He puts aside the one, that he may take the other in hand.

The five colours will blind a man's sight. The five sounds will deaden a man's hearing. The five tastes will spoil a man's palate.

Chasing and hunting will drive a man wild Things hard to get will do harm to a man's conduct.

Therefore the Sage makes provision for the stomach and not for the eye. He rejects the latter and chooses the former.

The Numbing Effect of the Conventional

The five colors stupefy the people's eyes.

The five tones desensitize the people's ears.

The five flavors numb the people's mouths.

Horse races and hunting derange the people's heart-minds.

Hard to get goods pervert the people's behavior.

Using this: Sages deem: act for the gut not the eye.

So they choose this and reject that.

Numerous colors make man sightless.

Numerous sounds make man unable to hear.

Numerous tastes make man tasteless.

Racing and pursuing game make man's heart violent.

Valuing rare things makes man worry about their safety.

Therefore, the wise concentrates on the belly and not on the temptations of the senses.

Thus, he abides in the one and foregoes the other.

The five colours blind man's eye.

The five tones deafen man's ears.

The five flavours dull man's taste.

Riding and hunting drive man's mind mad.

Precious goods alter man's behaviour.

Therefore the sage tries to fill the belly (the virtuous character) and not the eyes (the gateway to the emotions).

And so he discards one and keeps the other.

The five colors make people's eyes blind;

Galloping and hunting make people's heart go wild;

Goods hard to come by make people's acts injurious.

The five flavors make people's mouth numb;

The five notes make people's ears deaf.

Hence, when the sage man ruled,

He supported the stomach, but not the eye.

Therefore, he abandoned that and chose this.

The five colors blind a person's sight.

The five sounds deafen a person's hearing.

The five tastes dull a person's palate.

Races and hunting trips make a person wild.

Things that are hard to attain are detrimental to a person's conduct.

For this reason, the sage

Prepares his food according to the size of his stomach and not according to the size of his eyes.

He rejects surfeit, and opts for less.

The five colors make man's eyes blind;

The five notes make his ears deaf;

The five tastes injure his palate;

Riding and hunting

Make his mind go wild with excitement;

Goods hard to come by

Serve to hinder his progress.

Hence
the sage is

For the belly

Not for the eye.

Therefore
he discards the one and takes the other.

Abstaining From Desire

"The five colors [combined] the human eye will blind;

The five notes [in one sound] the human ear confound;

The five tastes [when they blend] the human mouth offend."

"Racing and hunting will human hearts turn mad,

Treasures high-prized make human conduct bad."

Therefore

The holy man attends to the inner and not to the outer. He abandons the latter and chooses the former.

If you look at bright light, you go blind. If you listen to loud noise, you go deaf. Tasting many flavours reduces the tongue's sensitivity. Many thoughts confuse the mind. Many desires break your heart. Don't crave anything. Simply fulfil your needs.

Five colors blind the eye;

Five tones deafen the ear;

Five flavors dull the palate.

Prancing and hunting render one restless;

Rare goods render one senseless.

Thus,

a sage aims at the stomach and not at the eye, discarding the latter in favor of the former.

The five colors blind eyes.

The five tones deafen ears.

The five tastes blur tongues.

Fast horses and breathtaking hunts make minds wild and crazy.

Things rare and expensive make people lose their way.

That's why a sage tends to the belly, not the eye, always ignores that and chooses this.

The five colours may blind one's eyes;

The five tones may deafen one's ears;

The five flavours may dull one's taste;

Racing and hunting may madden one's mind;

Rare commodities may prompt people's illicit activities.

Therefore,

The sage emphasizes the essentials of life, not the superficial temptations.\So he accepts this and rejects the other.

Five
colors blind the eye of man

Five tones deafen the ear of man

Five flavors chafe the mouth of man

Racing and hunting inspire the mind of man to express craziness

Goods difficult to obtain hamper the path of man.

Appropriately
it happens

That sages act from the center without acting from the eyes.

So
detach from that, grab this.

Colours blind the eyes of man. Sound makes him deaf. Flavours exhaust his taste.

Hunting and racing, by unchaining savage passions in him, madden his heart. The love of rare and difficult-to-obtain objects pushes him to efforts that harm him.

Therefore the Sage looks to his stomach, and not his senses. renounces this, in order to embrace that. (He renounces what causes wear, in order to embrace what conserves).

The five colors make one blind in the eyes

The five sounds make one deaf in the ears

The five flavors make one tasteless in the mouth

Racing and hunting make one wild in the heart

Goods that are difficult to acquire make one cause damage

Therefore the sage cares for the stomach and not the eyes

That's why he discards the other and takes this

Overindulgence in colorful, dazzling sights of the material world can lead to eye fatigue.

Overindulgence in loud music and noisy sounds can lead to loss of hearing.

Overindulgence in flavorful foods and confections can lead to the loss of one's appetite.

Overindulgence in exertions such as racing and hunting can lead to an unsettled, agitated, frantic state of mind.

The pursuit of rare treasures and material acquisitions can lead to ruin and shame upon one's character and reputation.

Because of all this, the sage focuses on his inner self. He satisfies his basic needs and does not obsess over the material things his eyes can see.

This is the reason he lets go of materialistic indulgence and embraces the simplicity of the Tao.

AVOIDING DESIRE

An excess of light blinds the human eye; an excess of noise ruins the ear; an excess of condiments deadens the taste. The effect of too much horse racing and hunting is bad, and the lure of hidden treasure tempts one to do evil.

Therefore the wise man attends to the inner significance of things and does not concern himself with outward appearances. Therefore he ignores matter and seeks the spirit.

The five colors blind a person's eyes;

The five musical notes deafen a person's ears;

The five flavors ruin a person's taste buds.

Horse-racing, hunting and chasing,

Drive a person's mind (hsin) to madness.

Hard-to-get goods,

Hinder a person's actions.

Therefore the sage is for the belly, not for the eyes.

Therefore he leaves this and chooses that.

The five colors blind the eye; the five notes deafen the ear; the five tastes dull the tongue. Reckless ambition will unbalance the mind; striving for earthly good produces unhealthy tension. Therefore the truly wise satisfy the inner self and ignore the external. They accept one and avoid the other.

The five colors can make us blind.

The five sounds can make us deaf.

The five flavors can deaden our taste.

Racing, chasing, and hunting can drive us mad.

The pursuit of treasure knocks us off the path.

Therefore, the Tao–Master follows his inner vision

rather than his outer vision.

He chooses this but not that.

Twelve

The five colors blind the eye.

The five tones deafen the ear.

The five flavors dull the taste.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Precious things lead one astray.

Therefore the sage is guided by what he feels and not by what he sees.

He lets go of that and chooses this.

The five colours make man blind;

The five sounds make man deaf;

The five tastes make man lose his sense of taste;

Riding and hunting make man wild with excitement;

Rare goods goad man into stealing;

Thus the sage does not satisfy his eyes with colours

But satisfy his stomach with enough food.

He discards the former and takes the latter.

The five colors make man's eyes go blind.

The five tones make man's ears go deaf.

The five tastes injure man's palate.

Hunting on horseback

Makes man's mind go crazy.

Rare goods

Impede man's action.

That is why the sage

Cares for the stomach, not for the eye.

Therefore he discards that and takes this.

Excessive colours impair your sight.

Excessive noise affects your hearing.

Excessive tastes will dull your taste buds.

Galloping and hunting on horseback will drive you crazy.

Coveting rare objects will impel people to commit crime.

Therefore, the sage aims to satiate the people's hunger.

He does not intend to feast their visual desires.

Hence, he rejects the latter but embraces the former.

Examination of Desires

Chien Yu

The five colors blind man's eyes;

The five tones deafen man's ears;

The five flavors vitiate man's taste;

Racing and hunting make man's heart go wild;

Hard-to-get articles impede man's movement.

Thus the Sage cares for the belly, not the eye.

Indeed, he rejects this and adopts that.

The five colours, if unharmonized, confuse the eye;

The five tones, if uncoordinated, offend the ear;

The five tastes, if crudely blended, vitiate the palate.

Unrestraint in hunting and pursuing confounds the mind;

Eagerness in the acquisition of rare goods impedes right action.

That is why the Sage looks within and not without;

He disregards That and nurtures This.

The five colors blind the eye.

The five notes deafen the ear.

The five flavors dull the taste.

Racing an hunting madden the heart.

Rare goods make men falter.

Therefore the sage

Tends to the belly not the eye.

He rejects the outward,

Clasps the inward.

The five basic colors can be made into countless combinations to perplex the eyes.

The five basic tones can be made into infinite compositions to bewilder the ears.

The five basic flavors can be made into numerous stimulations to confuse the tongue.

The pursuit of worldly pleasures can make the mind wild and uncontrollable.

The one who sees the deep nature of life would rather embrace the simple subtle essence of life.

XII.

Repressing
Desires

The
flash of commingled colors will blind the eyes,

The
jangle of musical sounds will deafen the ear,

By
the jumbling of tastes change in the mouth will arise,

And
with all of each five, sight, hearing and taste disappear.

The
maddening rush of the race, the wild hunting waste,

And
treasures hard to obtain, but hinder the mind;

So
the sage only acts for his own inner self, and the taste

Far
unsatisfied seeing and longing is left behind.

The five colours blind the eyes of man.

The five musical notes deafen the ears of man.

The five flavours dull the taste of man.

Violent running and hunting disturb the emotions of man.

Greed for rare objects is hurtful to the actions of man.

That is why the self-controlled man occupies himself with the unseen, he does not occupy himself with the things visible, he puts away the latter and seeks the former.

The
five colors

blind
the eye.

The
five tones

deafen
the ear

.
The five flavors

stick
to the palate.

Racing
and hunting

make
crazy the mind.

Temptations
make men do wrong.

The
Complete Thinker

takes
care of

the
hunger,

not
the senses.

Prefers

the
substance within

not
the illusion.

The five colours blind man's eye.

The five notes deafen man's ear.

The five tastes jade man's palate.

Galloping and hunting madden man's heart.

Goods that are difficult to obtain entangle man's conduct.

That is why the Saint cares for the belly and not for the eye.

For indeed, he rejects the one and chooses the other.

Colour's five hues from th' eyes their sight will take;

Music's five notes the ears as deaf can make;

The flavours five deprive the mouth of taste;

The chariot course, and the wild hunting waste

Make mad the mind; and objects rare and strange,

Sought for, men's conduct will to evil change.

Therefore
the sage seeks to satisfy (the craving of) the belly, and

not the (insatiable longing of the) eyes. He puts from him the

latter, and prefers to seek the former.

The five colors can blind the eye.
Racing-about on Quests can drive
you MAD!
Hard-won goals can make one falter on the path.
The five flavors
can dull one's taste.
The five tones can deafen the ears.
Therefore,
in 'ruling' the sages satisfy LIBIDO's instead of 'Ego's.'
They down-play
the one, and satisfy the other.

Too
much sound can make you deaf

Too many colors leave you blind

Can you let desire die down

And not leave emptiness behind?

Wanting
things can drive you mad

And acquisition makes you poor

See that you are everything

And leave off wanting more

THE five colours blind the eye.

The five tones deafen the ear.

The five flavours cloy the palate.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Rare goods tempt men to do wrong.

Therefore, the Sage takes care of the belly, not the eye.

He prefers what is within to what is without.

Too many colors blind the eye,

Too much music deafens the ear,

Too many flavors dull the palate,

Racing and hunting madden the mind,

Too much desire withers the heart.

In this manner the sage cares for people:

He provides for the inner being,

not the insatiable longing of the mind.

He fulfills his needs,

not worldly temptations.

Five colors blind the eye.

Five notes deafen the ear.

Five flavors make the palate go stale.

Too much activity deranges the mind.

Too much wealth causes crime.

The Master acts on what she feels and not what she sees.

She shuns the latter, and prefers to seek the former.

Endless drama in a group clouds consciousness. Too much noise overwhelms the senses. Continual input obscures genuine insight.

Do not substitute sensationalism for learning.

Allow time for silent reflection. Turn inward and digest what has happened. Let the senses rest and grow still.

Teach people to let go of their superficial mental chatter and obsessions. Teach people to pay attention to the whole body's reaction to a situation.

When group members have time to reflect, they can see more clearly what is essential in themselves and others.

Too many colors tax people's vision.

Too many sounds deaden people's hearing.

Too many flavors spoi people's taste.

Thrill-seeking leads people to do crazy things.

The pursuit of wealth just gets in people's way.

Therefore, the Sage provides for her needs,

not her desires.

She renounces the latter, and chooses the former.

The
oneness of the five colors blind the eyes.

The oneness of the five tones deafens the ears.

The oneness of the five flavors dull the tongue.

Racing
ahead of change

and pursuing the illusion of reality

promotes confusion.

Therefore,
the sage is in harmony with what she is

and does not distinguish what she sees.

She
chooses oneness and distinguishes nothing.

The five colors make one's eyes blind.

The five tones make one's ears deaf.

The five flavors make one's palate dull.

The mad dash of the hunt makes one's heart wild.

Hard to obtain goods promote theft.

Thus is the wise man led by the mind, not the eye,

to choose the former over the latter.

The five colours blind the eyes;1

The five notes deafen the ears;2

The five tastes spoil the palate;3

Riding and hunting madden the mind;

Rare treasure will distract one from the path.

Therefore the Sage provides for his inner needs, and not for his eyes.

Thus he rejects one and chooses the other.

1. The five primary colours are: red, yellow, green or blue, black and white.

2. The five notes of the Chinese pentatonic scale are: C, D, E, G and A.

3. The five tastes are: sweet, sour, bitter, acrid, and salty.

Loud colors blind the eye.

Wild hunting maddens the mind.

Precious objects cause thefts.

Delicious food confuses the taste.

Beautiful sounds deafen the ear.

That's why wise politics chooses the essentials

In all its matters

Instead of contriving impressive shows.

The five colours make people's eyes go blind the five tones make people's ears go deaf the five flavours make people's mouths turn sour.

Galloping and racing, bunting and chasing, make people's minds go mad. Goods hard to come by corrupt people's ways.

And so the Wise Person: Goes by the belly, not by the eye. Yes: He leaves 'that' aside, and attends to 'this'.

He who sees only five colors in the world is like the blind.

He who hears only the sounds of the material world is similar to the deaf.

He who partakes and feels only the taste of the material food is deluded.

He who rushes at full speed after his prey is insane.

By accumulating wealth and adornments, you act to the detriment of yourself.

The efforts of the wise are directed at having enough food, not at accumulating many objects. He, satisfied with little in the world of matter, chooses the Primordial.

The explosion of colors will blind the man,

The explosion of sounds will make his deaf,

The strong taste will weaken his taste feeling,

Being too much in the forest to catch animals,

Will make the man wild.

Things hard to get will make his mind stiff.

Thus, the Wise Person doesn't use too much his senses.

He lives more in his inner world.

The
five colors blind people's eyes. The five notes of the scale deafen people's
ears. The five flavors make people's palates go stale. Galloping about and hunting
deranges people's minds. Scarce commodities make people do injurious deeds.
For this reason the Sage acts for the belly and not for the eyes. So he gets
rid of that and takes this.

The five colors blind man's eyes.

The five notes deafen his ears.

The five tastes spoil his palate.

The chase and the hunt make his heart go mad.

The rare treasures constrain his actions.

Therefore, the Sage provides for the belly and not for the eyes;

He rejects that to prefer this.

Controlling the Senses

The five colors will blind one's eye.

The five tones will deafen one's ear.

The five flavors will jade one's taste.

Racing and hunting will drange one's mind.

Goods that are hard to get will obstruct one's way.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals

Regard teh center and not the eye.

Hence they discard one and receive the other.

Is a sunset beautiful to a blind man? Is a songbird harmonious to a deaf? Thoughts of this will weaken your mind. Be like a tree bending to the wind. Observe the world, but do not desire it.

The five colors darken the eye;

The five sounds will deaden the ear;

The five flavors weary the taste;

Chasing the beasts of the field

Will drive a man mad.

The goods that are hard to procure

Are hobbles that slow walking feet.

So
the Wise Man will do What his belly dictates

And never the sight of his eyes.

Thus he will choose this but not that.

Iridescent colours cause blindness.

Beautiful music causes deafness.

Delicious food causes loss of taste.

Racing and hunting cause madness.

Rare goods tempt people to rob and steal.

Therefore the sage only wants to feed the people rather than to dazzle them.

That's why he goes for the former and turns down the latter.

The five colors make one's eyes blind;

the five notes make one's ears deaf;

the five flavors make one's mouth fail;

and sport hunting on horseback makes one's heart/mind go crazy.

Goods hard to get cause one to travel the road to harm.

This is why the sage provides for the belly but not for the eye.

Thus he rejects the one and keeps the other.

1. The five colors cause one's eyes to go blind.

2. Racing horses and hunting cause one's mind to go mad.

3. Goods that are hard to obtain pose an obstacle to one's travels.

4. The five flavors confuse one's palate.

5. The five tones cause one's ears to go deaf.

6.
Therefore, in the government of the Sage:

7. He's for the belly and not for the eyes.

8. Thus he rejects that and take this.

Sight obscures.

Noise deafens.

Desire messes
with your heart.

The world messes with your mind.

A Master watches
the world

but keeps focused on what's real.

.

Satisfy the Inner Self

The five colors blind the eyes;

the five musical tones deafen the ears;

the five flavors dull the taste.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Precious goods keep their owners on guard.

Therefore the wise satisfy the inner self

rather than external senses.

They accept the one and reject the other.

Light too glaring endangers sight

Noise too loud deafens hearing

Spices too strong spoil taste

Craving for pleasure kills knowledge.

This is why the Awakened Man turns inward and rules the senses.

He lets go what passes

And seizes what lasts.

Senses

Lao Tze says,

A variety of colors (five colors) can blind the eyes.

A variety of sounds (five tones) can deafen the ears.

A mixture of flavors (five flavors) can vitiate the mouth of taste.

Hunting and horse chasing will make men's minds wild with excitement.

Goods hard to procure will bring character with harm.

Hence, the sage seeks to satisfy one's belly, rather than one's eyes.

Of the former one he does approve, of the latter he does reject.

THE REPRESSION OF DESIRES

Through
sight, the colours may be seen,

but too much colour blinds us.

Apprehending the tones of sound,

too much sound might make us deaf,

and too much flavour deadens taste.

When hunting for sport, and chasing for pleasure,

the mind easily becomes perplexed.

He who collects treasures for himself

more easily becomes anxious.

The
wise person fulfills his needs,

rather than sensory temptations.

Colors blind the eye.

Sounds deafen the ear.

Flavors numb the taste.

Thoughts weaken the mind.

Desires wither the heart.

The Master observes the world

but trusts his inner vision.

He allows things to come and go.

His heart is open as the sky.

Five excessive colors make people blind;

five excessive sounds make people deaf;

five excessive flavors rob people's taste;

racing and hunting make people mad;

and rare goods make people steal.

Thus a Sage ruler took care of people's basic-needs (stomachs), not their excessive-desires (luxuries).

Thus he eliminated desires and supplied needs.

Five colors blind the eyes.

Racing and hunting madden the heart.

Pursuing what is rare makes action deceitful.

Five flavors dull the palate.

Five tones deafen the ears.

So, the sage's method is for the belly, not for the eyes.

He abandons the latter and chooses the former.

XII

Brilliance
and splendors blind the eye

Competition and the hunt for fulfillment madden the mind

Grasping wealth leaves the hand useless for all else

Louder, faster, brighter: these things drown the senses

The
tao is subtle, quiet, soft

A thread easily lost in the tumult

Therefore a wise leader feeds the belly and not the senses

Brings the people back rather than driving them on

Colors

Colors blind people's eyes,

Sounds deafen their ears;

flavors spoil people's palates,

the chase and the hunt

craze people's minds;

goods hard to obtain

make people's actions harmful.

Therefore sages work for the middle

and not the eyes,

leaving the latter and taking the former.

Five colors harm the eyes.

Five tones impair the ear.

Five flavors numb the taste.

Horse racing and hunting make people exuberant.

Hard-to-get things burden people.

Therefore, the sage seeks inner satisfaction, rather than showy appearance.

That is, emphasizing what is on the inside, instead of what is on the outside.

The five colors blind the eye.

The five tones deafen the ear.

The five flavors cloy the palate.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Rare goods tempt men to do wrong.

Therefore, the sage takes care of the belly, not the eye.

He prefers what is within to what is without.

The five colors blind the eyes.

The five tones deafen the ears.

The five flavors dull the taste.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Therefore, sages emphasize health, not pleasure.

Choose this, let go of that.

The five colors blind the eye.

The five notes deafen the ear.

The five flavors dull the palate.

Racing and hunting drive the heart wild.

Goods that are hard to obtain hinder the journey.

Therefore,
the True Person

is guided more by the belly than the eye,

and prefers this within to that without. %~~

All
together

colors blind the eyes

sounds deafen the ears

tastes deaden the palate.

Seeking and pursuing and looking for and chasing

make for

insanity.

Expensive tastes

make one a slave.

Wise people

attend to the intuition

of stomach and feelings

rather than the desires of eye, ear and hand.

Let
go of that

take this.

The five colours tend to confuse the eye,

the five sounds of music can deafen the ear,

the five tastes all dull or spoil the palate.

Excess of hunting and chasing makes a mind go mad.

Things hard to get, keeps one on one's guard. Valuable things and products quite
hard to get, can impede their owner's progress.

So the wise man is concerned with his tummy before his eyes. He can consider
the tummy first, not the eye. That is: He disregards the world outside - "that",
and he accepts, goes for and in the end grabs the supernormal powers dormant
within - his daoist "this". Therefore he rejects the one but accepts the other.

The five colors

make a man's eyes blind;

Horseracing and hunting

make a man's mind go mad;

Goods that are hard to obtain

make a man's progress falter;

The five flavors

make a man's palate dull;

The five tones

make a man's ears deaf.

For these reasons,

In ruling, the sage

attends to the stomach, not to the eye.

Therefore,

He rejects the one and adopts the other.

Light will blind a man, sound will make him deaf, taste will ruin his palate, the chase will make him wild, and precious things will tempt him.

Therefore soes the wise man provide for the soul and not for the senses.

He ignores the one and takes the other with both hands.

Behind the Masks

Seeking to appear important creates blindness.

Polishing your image is a waste of time.

Do you want to spend your lives

as two masks,

forever hiding from each other?

Seeking to sound impressive creates deafness.

Let your words be simple, direct

and filled with love.

Seeking to please everyone creates tastelessness.

State your desires honestly.

Listen with acceptance.

Forgive graciously.

The energy needed

to maintain an image of yourself

while molding another one for your beloved

would light a small city.

Let go and discover your hearts and souls

behind the masks.

The five colours cause one's eyes to be blind. The five tones cause
one's ears to be deaf. The five flavours cause one's palate to be
spoiled.

Racing and hunting cause one's mind to be mad. Goods that are hard to get injure one's activities.

For this reason the sage is concerned with the belly and not the eyes, Therefore he rejects the one but accepts the other.

The five colors
can blind,

The five tones deafen,

The five tastes cloy.

The race, the hunt, can drive men mad

And their booty leave them no peace.

Therefore a sensible man

Prefers the inner to the outer eye:

He has his yes, --he has his no.

Too much color makes one blind;

Too much sound makes one deaf;

Too much flavor makes one lose his appetite.

Horse racing and hunting makes one's heart wild;

Scarce and valuable things makes one want to steal.

Therefore, great men made people value basic needs, not luxuries.

So, they kept the former and threw away the latter.

The five colors blind the inner eye.

The five tones deafen the inner ear.

The five flavors dull the inner tongue.

In pursuit of outer pleasures,

Racing and hunting madden the inner mind,

Rare goods obstruct inner progress.

Therefore,

The sage attends to that which is within, not that which is without.

He lives from the center, not from the periphery.

Loud colors blind the eye.

Wild hunting maddens the mind.

Precious objects cause thefts.

Delicious food confuses the taste.

Beautiful sounds deafen the ear.

That's why wise politics chooses the essentials

In all its matters

Instead of contriving impressive shows.

Too many colors blind the eye,

Too much music deafens the ear,

Too many flavors dull the palate,

Racing and hunting madden the mind,

Too much desire withers the heart.

In this manner the sage cares for people:

He provides for the inner being,

not the insatiable longing of the mind.

He fulfills his needs,

not worldly temptations.

