===== Chapter 58 =====

[When] the government is toned down and uninterested

The people are honest and unsophisticated.

[When] the government is scrutinizing and clinical:

The people lack and run short.

Misfortune still depends on that which is of good fortune.

Good fortune still conceals that which is of misfortune.

Who knows the final end [of this]?

[Even] this is not correct.

Correctness reverts to being strange.

Goodness reverts to being evil.

Peoples' bewilderment—

Its days certainly have lasted a long time.

Therefore, the sages

Square but do not cut.

Inspect but do not stab.

Are straightforward but not unrestrained.

Luminous but not dazzling.

If government is muted and muffled People are cool and refreshed. If
government investigates and intrudes, People are worn down and hopeless.

Bad fortune rests upon good fortune. Good luck hides within bad luck.

Who knows how it will end? If there is no principle Principle reverts to
disorder, Good reverts to calamity, People's confusion hardens and
lingers on.

Therefore the Sage squares without cutting, Corners without dividing, Straightens without extending, Shines without dazzling.

When the government is dull and not meddlesome

The people are pure and honest.

When the government is shrewd and meddlesome

The people are restless and poor.

Good fortune leans on disaster.

Disaster lurks in good fate.

Is there a way to end this?

Is there a norm of what's right?

What's normal becomes abnormal.

What's good becomes evil.

With each passing day people grow more confused.

That is why the sage is sharp but he does not cut.

He burnishes but he does not harm.

He straightens but he does not break.

He shines but he does not dazzle.

CYCLE OF CHANGES

When the government governs little, ruling with a light hand,

The people are happy and content.

When the government governs much, ruling with severity,

The people are tense and contentious.

A continuing cycle -

Misery and calamity, being unsustainable,

Are precursors of happiness to come.

Likewise happiness, A precursor of misery and calamity.

At any moment, one rarely takes to heart the certainty of this cycle,

For the realization of certainty is itself uncertain.

With good turning to evil and evil to good,

What is right, what is wrong ?

No wonder mankind has been long astray.

The Sage, Knowing what is best, is just - Not forcing others to conform.

Having integrity, does not injure others.

Being straightforward, is gently firm.

Emitting light without display,

Flows spontaneously toward his destination.

When the government is dull, dull, the people are pure, pure.

When the government is sharp, sharp, the people are broken, broken.

Bad fortune! There is good fortune to lean on.

Good Fortune! There is bad fortune concealed within it.

Who can know the end?

There is no normal.

The normal, in turn, becomes the abnormal.

The good, in turn, becomes evil.

The people are confused and try many paths.

The sun is strong and enduring.

The sage is square* and the corners do not injure.

They have corners and do not pierce.

They have truth and do not overreach.

They have the light that does not blind.

* The square is the planar form of the cube which is the Platonic Solid that represents the energetic structure of SoulType 4.

ADAPTATION TO ENVIRONMENT

The government that exerciseth the least care serveth the people best;

that which meddleth with everybody's business worketh all manner of harm.

Sorrow and joy are bedfellows; who can divine the final result of either?

Shall
we avoid restriction? Yea; restriction distorteth nature, so that

even what seemeth good in it is evil. For how long have men suffered

from misunderstanding of this.

The
wise man is foursquare, and avoideth aggression; his corners do not

injure others. He moveth in a straight line and turneth not aside therefrom;

he is brilliant but doth not blind with his brightness.

The government that seems the most unwise, Oft goodness to the peoplebest supplies; That which is meddling, touching everything, Will work butill, and disappointment bring.

Misery! -happiness is to be found by its side! Happiness! - miserylurks beneath it! Who knows what either will come in the end? Shall wethen dispense with correction? The (method of) correction shall by a turnbecome distortion, and the good in it shall by a turn become evil. Thedelusion of the people (on this point) has indeed subsisted for a longtime. Therefore the sage is (like) a square which cuts no one (with itsangles): (like) a corner which injures no one (with its sharpness). Heis straightforward, but allows himself no license; he is bright, but doesnot dazzle.

The fewer rules and laws there are, the happier mankind will be

The more rules and laws, the more there will be of dissatisfaction and conflicts

Someone's wealth comes at the expense of someone else's poverty

Misery for one is the result of someone else's wealth

When will this ever stop?

One who is wise is righteous and won't play that game

He is just and fair and will never hurt anybody

He shines, but does not blind

When government governs little, people are happy. When government governs much, people are miserable.

Thus happiness depends on little, And misery depends on much.

What does the desire to govern come to? To restrict interferers is itself interference. So attempts to increase happiness end only in misery. Mankind has been foolish for so long a time!

The intelligent man knows what is best, but does not make others conform. He knows directions, but does not direct. He pursues the straightest way to the goal, but does not urge others to deviate from their course. He is enlightened, but he cares not whether others see his light.

When the ruler looks repressed the people will be happy and satisfied;

When the rule looks lively and self-assured the people will be carping and discontented.

"It is upon bad fortune that good fortune leans, upon good fortune that bad fortune rests."

But though few know it, there is a bourn where there is neither right nor wrong;

In a realm where every straight is doubled by a crooked,

And every good by an ill, surely mankind has gone long enough astray?

Therefore the Sage

Squares without cutting,

Shapes the corners without iopping,

Straightens without stretching,

Gives forth light without shining.

When government does not interfere, the people are genuine.

When government intrudes, the people are cunning.

Happiness is founded on misery.

Misery lurks within happiness.

Is there an end to it?

Nothing stays the same.

Honesty moves with deceit.

Good flows with evil.

But people's delusion persists.

Thus, the sage is sharp but not divisive,

straightforward but not hurtful,

principled but not severe,

illumined but not blinding.

(Where) their government is muted & dull

Its people are honest & sincere

(Where) their government is efficient & exacting

Its people are partial & wanting

Ah, suffering! That happiness has such things to rely on!

Ah, happiness! That suffering has such places to lurk!

Who comprehends their outcomes?

Are there no rules?

The rules go back to behaving strangely

The good return to acting ominously

Humankind has held its delusions

For such an entrenched length of days

This is why wise ones

Are direct but not divisive

Exacting but not hurtful

To the point but not tactless

Bright but not dazzling

Be forgiving

When the government is muddled and confused,

The people are genuine and sincere.

When the government is discriminate and clear,

The state is crafty and cunning.

Disaster is that on which good fortune depends.

Good fortune is that in which disaster is concealed.

Who knows where it will end?

For there is no [fixed] "correct".

The correct turns into the "deviant".

And good turns into evil.

People's state of confusion

Has certainly existed for a long time.

Therefore be square but do not cut,

Be sharp but do not stab,

Be straightforward but not unrestrained,

Be bright but do not dazzle.

When the government is dull and sleepy, people are wholesome and good. When the government is sharp and exacting, people are cunning and mean.

Good rests upon bad. Bad hides within good.

Who knows where the turning point is? Whether government or person, if you aren't tranquil and honest, the normal flips to the abnormal, the auspicious reverts to the bizarre, and your bewilderment lasts for a long time.

Therefore the sage does what is right without acting righteous, points without piercing, straightens without straining, enlightens without dazzling.

When the government lacks power and brilliance,

Organic simplicity suffuses the people.

When the government is intrusive and vigilant,

Deceit and resentment are the coin of the realm.

Misfortune enters the life

That is propped up on success,

And misery lurks beneath

The lustrous show of affluence.

Life that lacks limits lacks duration.

If it is elevated today,

It will be tomorrow maligned.

When everything is changing,

Nothing is transformed.

Insight is caked with the ink of the prophets.

Will there be no end to this delusion?

Thus, the counsel of the Sage:

If you are sharp within,

You needn't cut without.

You can be pointed in your depths,

But carry neither slings nor arrows.

Straighten out your inner edges

Without defining outer boundaries.

If you can glow like a lantern,

You won't have to shine.

Affluence and power fail to endure because they require the support of an illusion of success, which is inevitably exposed. There is no such thing as grandeur, either in being the most powerful nation or the most famous person; there is only an outer display, which needs increasingly greater energy to disguise itself as genuine success. Thus, the effort of vigilance in maintaining an image is never relaxed: though its presentation may vary, such change is superficial and ephemeral, and will never endure. In the realm of image-making, therefore, "deceit and resentment are the coin," because the shifts in the landscape are confined to the apparent, and leave the inner plane ignored or repressed; thus, the deep and lasting glow of transformation is completely lacking.

The way of the Sage is to turn within and scrape away the overlaid delusions of grandeur with which the prophets and self-styled seers have obscured the original insight of true nature. This is the "inner cutting" which requires no outer sharpness; the inner light that doesn't need to shine. True insight lacks glare; thus, it endures.

To Govern, Be Gentle

Govern
passively, the people are happy.

Govern precisely, the people are restless.

Happiness
arises from unhappiness;

unhappiness lies beneath happiness.

Who knows what is best?

When
the state is self-righteous,

self-righteousness becomes strategy

and good becomes evil.

Man has long been misguided.

The
truly wise are:

square (sharp-cornered) but not cutting;

angled (wedge-like) but not interfering;

straight (pointed) but not domineering;

bright (enlightened) but not binding.

When the government is not in evidence the people are honest and loyal.

When the government is meddlesome the people are in want.

Misery! Happiness lies by its side! Happiness! Misery lurks underneath. He who understands the end has progressed beyond limitations.

The regular becomes irregular; the good becomes unpropitious. This has bewildered men from time immemorial!

Hence the Holy Man is a square which has not been cut, and whose corners have not been planed; he is straightforward without being reckless, and bright without being dazzling.

When the government is blunt and inactive the people will be happy and prosperous;

When the government is discriminative, the people will be dissatisfied and restless.

It is upon misery that happiness rests;

It is under happiness that misery lies.

Who then can know the supremacy (good government)?

Only when the government does no rectifying.

Otherwise the rectitude will again become stratagem,

And good beome evil.

Men have been ignorant of this, since long ago.

Therefore the Sage is square but does not cut others;

He is angled but does not chip others;

He is straight but does not stretch others;

His is bright but does not dazzle others.

Political Reversal

Its regime is torpid

its people are guileless.

Its government is critically discriminating

its people are deficient.

Calamity! The ground of fortuity.

Fortuity! The obverse of calamity.

Who knows its pivot?

It lacks a 'correct'

The 'correct' returns to be deemed unorthodox.

Worthiness returns to be deemed an apparition.

Human superstition

a truly old story.

Using this: Sages

square things without carving

Are fair without punishing.

Are straight without being arbitrary.

Are bright without dazzling us.

When the country is governed through simplicity and leniency,

The people are genuine and honest.

When the country is governed through harshness and sharp investigation,

The people are more deceitful and dishonest.

From misfortune, good fortune is derived.

In good fortune, misfortune is conceived.

Who can determine the ultimate truth?

Or is there no ultimate truth at all?

As truth often turns out to be untruth,

Goodness often turns out to be evil.

This has long confused the people.

Thus, when the wise deals with things he is firm in his principles,

Yet not sharp.

He is pure, yet not harmful.

He is straightforward, yet not violent.

He is illuminated, yet not glittery.

When the government is unobtrusive, the people will be simple and honest.

When the government is dictatorial, the people will be seized with panic.

Fortune depends on misfortune.

Misfortune is hidden in fortune.

He who knows how to stay within the limits will not have misfortune.

Correctness will lead to deceit.

Good will lead to evil.

Nothing can remain always the same.

People have been confused by this since ancient times.

That is why the sage

behaves correctly without hurting others,

behaves honestly without damaging others,

behaves straightforwardly without vilifying others,

behaves brightly without dazzling others.

If your government is muddled,

Your people will be simple;

If your government is exacting,

Your people will be daring.

Against misfortune leans good fortune;

In good fortune lurks misfortune.

Who knows its extremity?

There is no norm.

Normal reverts to abnormal;

Good reverts to evil.

The perplexity of rulers

Has been long indeed!

Hence, be square without cutting,

Angular without pricking;

Straight without binding;

Bright without dazzling.

Although the wise man rules the country with integrity,

And wages war cunningly,

He who wishes to rule the empire

Must not interfere with anything.

His wish is unattainable in any other way.

How do I know this?

Thus:

The more limitations and prohibitions there are,

The more poor people there will be.

The more weapons people possess,

The more riots there will be throughout the country.

The more artists and artisans there are among the people,

The greater the desire to create things that belong to the imagination.

The more rules and regulations there are,

The more robbers and thieves there will be.

Therefore the sage says:

When I choose non-action of my own accord,

The people reach the path of their own accord.

When I love peace and quiet of my own accord,

The people behave with integrity of their own accord.

When I desist from all occupation of my own accord,

The people become very wealthy of their own accord.

When I am free of all desire of my own accord,

The people remain simple of their own accord.

When the government is muddled

The people are simple;

When the government is alert

The people are cunning.

It
is on disaster that good fortune perches;

It is beneath good fortune that disaster crouches.

Who
knows the limit? Does not the straightforward exist?

The straighforward changes again into the crafty, and the good changes again
into the monstrous.

Indeed, it is long since the people were perplexed.

Therefore
the sage is square-edged but does not scrape,

Has corners but does not jab,

Extends himself but not at the expense of others,

Shines but does not dazzle.

Adaptation to Change

Whose government is unostentatious, quite unostentatious, his people will be prosperous, quite prosperous. Whose government is prying, quite prying, his people will be needy, quite needy.

Misery, alas! rests upon happiness. Happiness, alas! underlies misery. But who foresees the catastrophe? It will not be prevented!

What is ordinary becomes again extraordinary. What is good becomes again unpropitious. This bewilders people, and it happens constantly since times immemorial.

Therefore the holy man is square but not sharp, strict but not obnoxious, upright but not restraining, bright but not dazzling.

A father that is understanding and kind has children who are honest and content. A father that is strict and harsh has children who are deceitful and cunning. The higher the standard a farther expects, the lower the results for the child. Try to make a child happy and you will bring about his misery. Force morals on a child, and he will become immoral. Realise that every coin has two sides. All a father can do is set an example which he would be happy for his children to mimic.

When policies are broad, the populace live simply;

When policies are rigid, the populace complain roundly.

Facing disaster, is fortune not in the wing?

Experiencing fortune, is disaster not ready to spring?

Who knows the limit?

There is no norm.

Orthodoxy turns into heterodoxy, good turns into evil.

People have been bewildered long.

Thus,

the sage is square without infringing upon others,

fair without harming others,

straight without imposing upon others,

bright without overshadowing others.

When government is pensive and withdrawn people are pure and simple.

When government is confident and effective people are cunning and secretive.

Prosperity springs from calamity and calamity lurks in prosperity.

Who knows where it will all end

without leaders of principle?

And principle always reverts to sinister trickery,

virtue to depraved sorcery.

People have been confused for such a long long time.

That's why a sage is sharp but never cuts,

austere but never grates,

forthright but never provokes,

bright but never dazzles.

When a ruler is tolerant and understanding,

The people will be loyal and obedient;

When a ruler is intolerant and overbearing,

The people will be resentful and resistant.

There are misfortunes wherein clues of blessings lie;

There are blessings wherein seeds of misfortunes hide.

Who would know the final outcome?

There is no rule to go by!

Normalcy reverts to chaos;

Good reverts to evil.

People have puzzled over these for a long time!

Therefore a wise ruler is:

Square but not cutting,

Sharp but not piercing,

Straight but not stretching and

Illustrious but not dazzling.

They
who administrate are covered, muffled

Their people are pure, honest

They who administrate are exacting, scrutinizing

Their people are incomplete, deficient.

Such
misfortune!

The place of happiness place is to lean upon it

Such happiness!

The place of misfortune is to be suppressed.

Who
knows its limit?

It is absent from the correct.

The
correct returns, acting surprising

The valued returns, acting as evil spirits.

The
dirt in the eye of men,

It is solid, everyday, long-lasting.

Appropriately
it happens that sages are

Square yet without cutting

Pointed yet without piercing

Straight yet not unbridled

Bright yet not dazzling.

When the government is simple, the people abound in virtue. When the government is political, the people lack virtue.

Good and bad succeed one anther, alternately.

Who will discern the heights? (of this circular movement, of good and evil. It is very delicate, an excess or a default changing the moral entity). In many the right measure is lacking. In some an exaggerated righteousness degenerates into a mania. In others an exaggerated goodness becomes extravagance. (Points of view changing in consequence. For a long time now, men have thus been crazy.

The Sage takes them as they are). Taking them to task, he is not sharp or cutting. Straight, he is not rude. Enlightened, he does not humiliate.

When governing is lackluster

The people are simple and honest

When governing is scrutinizing

The people are shrewd and crafty

Misfortune is what fortune depends upon

Fortune is where misfortune hides beneath

Who knows their ultimate end?

They have no determined outcome

Rightness reverts to become strange

Goodness reverts to become wicked

The confusion of people

Has lasted many long days

Therefore the sages are:

Righteous without being scathing

Incorruptible without being piercing

Straightforward without being ruthless

Illuminated without being flashy

From the perspective of Tao sages, the ideal way to govern is one that rules without excessive interference in people's lives. A government that follows this does not put a spotlight on itself, but the peace and freedom it provides allow the people to live the simple and honest life.

The opposite to this would be a government that is severe, one that scrutinizes the people's every move. Such a government may appear to be very capable and brutally effective, but because it burdens the people with restrictions and intrudes upon their privacy, it creates an environment where people are forced to become ever more evasive, resorting to trickery to hide their activities.

Therefore, it is hard to say what is good fortune and what is bad. A ruler may think it's a good thing to be able to spy on people, without realizing that this leads to ever more complications and alienation. What seems like a good idea can turn into a disaster and vice versa. Who can predict how things will ultimately turn out?

It is because worldly affairs are unpredictable, and can suddenly change without notice, that it can be very confusing for anyone to know what to do. This is why sages say the best idea to follow the Tao and not try to analyze every little detail. Logical, rational analyses can, and often does, yield the wrong conclusion, but the true Tao will never lead you astray.

Specifically, the Tao would guide you as follows:

1. Be forthright, correct, and just in your actions, but do not become self-righteous and condemn those who fail to live up to your standards in a scathing way.

2. Be honest in your dealings, resist the temptation of briberies, and maintain the integrity of your honor. However, do not seek to impose the same discipline upon others in a piercing way.

3. Be direct and straightforward in your communication. Say what you mean and mean what you say, but keep in mind that this does not mean being unfeeling and cold-blooded. Be strict with yourself but forgiving with others.

4. Be enlightened, see things clearly for what they are, not what you wish them to be. You can have a light that illuminates those around you, without turning it on them and blind them with its glare.

ADAPTATION TO CHANGE

When an administration is unostentatious the people are simple. When an administration is inquisitive, the people are needy. Misery, alas, supports happiness. Happiness, alas, conceals misery. Who knows its limits? It never ceases. The normal becomes the abnormal. The good in turn becomes unlucky. The people's confusion is felt daily for a long time.

Therefore the wise man is square, yet does not injure, he is angular but does not annoy. He is upright but is not cross. He is bright but not glaring.

When the government (cheng) is dull,

Its people are wholesome;

When the government is efficient (ch'a),

Its people are deficient (ch'üeh).

Calamities (huo) are what blessings depend on,

In blessings are latent calamities (huo).

Who knows where is the turning point (chi)?

Because there is no longer the normal (cheng),

The normal reverts and appears as the strange (ch'i),

The good reverts and appears as the uncanny.

Rulers (jen) have lost their way,

For a long stretch of days.

Therefore the sage is square but not cutting (ko),

Sharp but not injurious,

Straight but not overreaching,

Bright (kuang) but not dazzling.

To Govern Be Gentle

Govern passively, the people are happy. Govern precisely, the people are restless. Happiness arises from unhappiness; unhappiness lies beneath happiness. Who knows what is best? When the state is self?righteous, self?righteousness becomes strategy and good becomes evil. Man has long been misguided. The truly wise are: square (sharp-cornered) but nut cutting; angled (wedge-like) but not interfering; straight (pointed) but not domineering; bright (enlightened) but not binding.

When the government is restrained,

the people are happy and satisfied.

When the government meddles in everything,

the people are disgruntled and miserable.

Happiness eclipses misery.

Misery eclipses happiness.

Which will it be?

The straight becomes crooked.

Good becomes evil.

The people remain bewildered.

Thus, the Tao–Master is sharp but not cutting, incisive but not biting,

straight but not controlling, bright but not glaring.

Fifty-eight

When the country is ruled with a light hand

The people are simple.

When the country is ruled with severity,

The people are cunning.

Happiness is rooted in misery.

Misery lurks beneath happiness.

Who knows what the future holds?

There is no honesty.

Honesty becomes dishonest.

Goodness becomes witchcraft.

Man's bewitchment lasts for a long time.

Therefore
the sage is sharp but not cutting,

Pointed but not piercing,

Straightforward but not unrestrained,

Brilliant but not blinding.

When the governor is magnanimous,

The people will become simple;

When the governor is harsh,

The people will become cunning.

Disaster hides itself behind good fortune;

Good fortune leans against disaster.

Who knows the secret?

There is no definite answer.

The normal changes into the abnormal;

The good changes into the evil.

People have been long perplexed.

Thus the sage is square and upright

But does not wound the people;

He is edged but does not cut the people;

He is candid but does not behave wantonly;

He gives light but does not dazzle.

When the government is dull,

The people are simple.

When the government is keen,

The people are discontented.

Bad fortune is what good fortune leans on;

Good fortune is where bad fortune lurks.

Who knows the fortune's end?

There is nothing straight.

What is straight turns monstrous.

What is beautiful turns grotesque.

Man has been deluded

From time immemorial.

Therefore the sage

Is square without cutting;

Honest without scraping;

Straight without overbearing;

Bright without dazzling.

When the government is magnanimous, the people are contented and unsophisticated.

When the government is overbearing and mean-spirited, the people are resentful and miserable.

Whenever calamity occurs, boon is also lurking around the corner.

Whenever good fortune strikes, misfortune is always stalking in its shadow.

Nobody will ever know how things will end in any given situation, as there are no fixed patterns.

Sometimes, a normal affair can turn out to become exceptionally eventful.

Sometimes, an apparently good thing can go terribly wrong.

For a very long time, these things continue to befuddle the ordinary people.

Nevertheless, the sage is always sharp but not cutting.

He is incorruptible but not contemptuous of others.

He is upright and direct but not repugnant.

He is brilliant but not dazzling.

Transformation Without Friction

Shun Hua

When the government is shrouded in gloom,

The people will be simple and honest.

When the government is sharp and officious,

The people will get disgusted and discontented.

Misfortune is what fortune leans on;

Fortune is where misfortune conceals itself.

Who can know the ultimate result?

Is there no justice?

Anyway, justice will become injustice again,

And good will turn into evil once more.

Mankind has been thus deluded for a long time.

That's why the Sage acts four-square,

But does not "cut" people to his own shape;

He has a high sense of integrity,

But is not offensive to people;

He is upright and straightforward,

But does not push people around;

He is bright and brilliant,

But does not outshine people.

Whenthe government seems hesitant and lacking in vitality,

The people are free and happy.

When the government is active nad interfering,

The people are discontented and critical.

"Misery," it is said, "rests on happiness, and happiness underlies misery";

But who sees that there is a supreme state where nothing is imposed?

For if right action becomes mere expediency

And belief in goodness becomes mere superstition,

The peole wil pass their days in a fog of bewilderment.

Therefore the Sage:

Though square himself, does not seek to shape others;

Thought he has his own angles, he does not ask others to match them;

Though he is himself straight, he does not seek to stretch others;

He shines, but he does not make a display of himself.

When the law is dumb dumb,

The people are simple simple.

When the law is smart smart,

The people are broke broke.

Good fortune rests on bad fortune;

Bad fortune hides in good fortune.

Who knows the end of this?

It does not stop:

The normal turns into the odd;

The good turns into the weird.

Long have the people been in a stew!

Therefore the sage is

Severe, but he doesn't cut;

Exact, but he doesn't hurt;

Straight, but he doesn't strain;

Bright, but he doesn't dazzle.

When the government does not interfere, the people are simple and happy.

When the government does interfere, the people are tense and cunning.

Disaster is what blessing perches on.

Blessing is where disaster abides.

Who can say what the ultimate end of all possibilities will be?

Appropriate means soon become unfitting.

Good means soon turn to evil.

Long indeed have the people been perplexed by the endless, topsy-turvy movement of life.

Therefore, one of subtle virtue dissolves and eliminates the vicious cycle of duality.

He may have sharp corners, but he does not jab.

He may extend himself, but not at the expense of others.

He may shine, but he does not dazzle.

LVIII.

Accord
with Changes

With
a government of liberality

The
people all enjoy prosperity,

When
government has keen and prying eyes,

Then
poverty and misery arise.

For
happiness, alas! but only hides

The place behind where misery abides,

And
misery ever leans on happiness;

Who knows
its end? or is it limitless?

When
uprightness in turn appears as strange,

Then
goodness, too, to strangeness soon will change,

Confusion
of mankind! its day of wrong!

Assuredly
it has continued long.

Therefore,
the sage is square, hut injures none,

Is
angular, but hurt has never done,

Is
strict, yet no restriction undertakes,

And
dazzles not while he illuminates.

If the government is from the heart the people will be richer and richer.

If the government is full of restrictions the people will be poorer and poorer.

Miserable! you rely on coming happiness.

Happy! you crouch under dread of coming misery.

You may know the end from the beginning.

If a ruler is in line with Inner Life his strategy will come right, his bad luck will become good, and the people will be astonished.

Things have been so for a long time.

That is why the self-controlled man is just and hurts no one, is true and takes no licence; he shines, and offends not by his brightness.

Where the leader is quiet, quiet,

The people are simple and happy.

Where the leader is dishonest, dishonest,

The people are tricky and unhappy.

Bad fortune is what

good fortune leans on,

Good fortune is what

bad fortune hides in.

Who knows the final end of this process?

Is there not a normal of right?

What is normal, soon

becomes not normal,

And what is good soon

turns bad.

Long indeed have the

people been in difficulty.

The Complete Thinker:

makes even without cutting,

Is honest without hurting,

Is direct without effort,

Teaches without causing the mind to be excited.

If government is mope-eyed, the people will be faultless.

If government is far-sighted, the people will be full of flaws.

Bad fortune is what good fortune leans on.

Good fortune is what bad fortune hides in.

Who may know the acme of either?

Since there is no normal condition, the correct reverts to what is bizarre and the good reverts to what spells evil, but people indeed are deluded for a long time.

Therefore the Saint is square without being pointed, he is straight without being stretched, he is bright without being polished.

The government that seems the most unwise,

Oft goodness to the people best supplies;

That which is meddling, touching everything,

Will work but ill, and disappointment bring.

Misery!--happiness
is to be found by its side! Happiness!--misery

lurks beneath it! Who knows what either will come to in the end?

Shall
we then dispense with correction? The (method of) correction

shall by a turn become distortion, and the good in it shall by a turn

become evil. The delusion of the people (on this point) has indeed

subsisted for a long time.

Therefore
the sage is (like) a square which cuts no one (with its

angles); (like) a corner which injures no one (with its sharpness).

He is straightforward, but allows himself no license; he is bright,

but does not dazzle.

When a society is composed of free, self-governing individuals,
the
people are honest;
when there is a 'legalistic' government 'ruling' the people,

a true society is lacking.
Disaster
brings-forth the best in people, and new innovations;
having more than one's
own share is that wherein Disaster lurks!
Who knows where this will end?!

When
there is no uprightness,
correctness reverts to craftiness;
goodness
reverts to the gruesome.
The
delusion of mankind;
how LONG has been it's Reign!
For
this reason, be:
Solid
but not abrasive;
Pointed but not agressive;
Right-On but not arrogant;

Bright but not dazzling.

Let
your lead be gentle

And people will be satisfied

Let it be severe and harsh

And be rejected and defied

Happiness
may reign today

But who knows what tomorrow holds?

Sadness too will have its time

As all ten thousand things unfold

The
seer's sight is sharp and pointed

But it does not cut or pierce

The seer sees and shows the truth

This gentle way is never fierce

WHERE the ruler is mum, mum,

The people are simple and happy.

Where the ruler is sharp, sharp,

The people are wily and discontented.

Bad fortune is what good fortune leans on,

Good fortune is what bad fortune hides in.

Who knows the ultimate end of this process?

Is there no norm of right?

Yet what is normal soon becomes abnormal,

And what is auspicious soon turns ominous.

Long indeed have the people been in a quandary.

Therefore, the Sage squares without cutting, carves vfithout disfiguring, straightens without straining, enlightens without dazzling.

When a government is unobtrusive and tolerant the people will be happy and prosperous;

when a government is suspicious and strict the people are dissatisfied and crafty.

Good fortune is linked to calamity; misery is tied to happiness.

So who can tell when the end of this will come?

Is there no measuring-stick for the norm?

What is seen now as right and true will certainly someday be seen as wrong and false.

The people have labored under this sea of vexations for a long time.

Therefore the Master is square without sharp cutting corners.

His straightness is not strained; he is pointed without being piercing.

And he is bright but not blinding.

If a government is unobtrusive,

the people become whole.

If a government is repressive,

the people become treacherous.

Good
fortune has its roots in disaster,

and disaster lurks with good fortune.

Who knows why these things happen,

or when this cycle will end?

Good things seem to change into bad,

and bad things often turn out for good.

These things have always been hard to comprehend.

Thus
the Master makes things change

without interfering.

She is probing yet causes no harm.

Straightforward, yet does not impose her will.

Radiant, and easy on the eye.

Group process evolves naturally. It is self-regulating. Do not interfere. It will work itself out.

Efforts to control process usually fail. Either they block process or make it chaotic.

Learn to trust what is happening. If there is silence, let it grow; something will emerge. If there is a storm, let it rage, it will resolve into calm.

Is the group discontented? You can't make it happy. Even if you could, your efforts might well deprive the group of a very creative struggle.

The wise leader knows how to facilitate the unfolding group process, because the leader is also a process. The group's process and the leader's process unfold in the same way, according to the same principle.

The leader knows how to have a profound influence without making things happen.

For example, facilitating what is happening is more potent than pushing for what you wish were happening. Demonstrating or modeling behaviour is more potent than imposing morality. Unbiased positions are stronger than prejudice. Radiance encourages people, but outshining everyone else inhibits them.

When a government is unobtrusive

The people are simple and honest.

When a government is suspicious and strict

The people are discontented and sneaky.

Blessings are rooted in misery.

Misery lurks behind blessing.

Where does it ever end?

There is no such thing as "normal."

What seems norma is only an illusion,

And what seems good is finally revealed to be monstrous.

The people's confusion has lasted a very long time.

Therefore the Sage is honest, but not judgmental

Strong, but not injurious to others

Straightforward, but not reckless

Bright, but not blinding.

When
the country is ruled with indifference,

the people flow in peace and harmony.

When the country is ruled with purpose,

the people become tense and circumvent the

law.

When
distinctions are made,

good fortune is the harbinger of disaster

and adversity is the foundation of

prosperity.

The only known is change and the limits of

change are unpredictable.

Because
everything changes, nothing seems real.

The reliable becomes questionable

and the questionable becomes familiar.

The
confusion created by distinctions

is ever present.

Therefore
the sage is:

upright but not judgmental,

to the point but not arrogant,

straightforward but not offensive,

is a light but not blinding.

When Government is subdued, people are simple and honest.

When Government is obtrusive, people are lax and careless.

Disaster acts upon Blessings.

Blessings are subject to Disaster.

Who knows where it all ends ?

It's not right.

Proper becomes improper.

Good turns Evil.

People lose their bearings.

Thus is the wise man

critical but not harsh,

calm but not cutting,

firm but not reckless,

bright but not blinding.

When the government is unobtrusive,

The people are content and honest.

When the government is severe and exacting,

The people are restless and cunning.

Good fortune has its roots in misfortune,

And misfortune lurks beneath good fortune.

Who knows the limits of this?

Is anything as it appears to be?

What is normal becomes abnormal,

And what is auspicious becomes ominous.

This being so has perplexed people for a long time.

Therefore the Sage is pointed like a square, but does not pierce.

He is sharp like a knife, but does not cut.1

He is straight like a stick, but does not extend himself.

He is bright like light, but does not dazzle.

1. The Sage is intellectually penetrating, but he does not show up other people's muddledness.

If the government seems dark and tolerant,

The people will be honest and friendly;

If the government seems bright and sophisticated,

The people will be sly and cold-hearted.

What is bad goes with what is good;

What is good lies in what is bad.

Who can tell the exact difference

When all factors are considered?

The positive changes into the negative

And the negative changes into the positive.

Changing over and over again is the action of evil souls.

Such action has long been a confusing force in the world.

The wise person therefore prefers to be a simple square

That points in no directions,

A cutting tool that has no edge,

A straight line that goes nowhere,

And a light source that causes no fire.

When the ruler is dull and incompetent, the people are pure and simple. When the ruler is sharp and alert, the people are a bad lot.

"Bad luck: good luck depends on it good luck: bad luck hides in it."

Who knows where this ends? There is no norm. What accords with the norm turns around and becomes weird what is excellent turns around and becomes ominous. "People's blindness - it has been going on so long now."

And so the Wise Person: Is square and honest but does not cut is pointed and exact but does not hurt is straight and direct but not tactless shines but does not dazzle.

When earthly rulers rule in calm and harmony, people, too, are calm and peaceful. And they do not aspire to anything outside this wellbeing...

On the contrary, if earthly rulers act with irritation and aggressiveness, then people begin to suffer. Wellbeing is replaced then with troubles and calamities. And people begin to seek the way out, and some of them find it by coming to non-doing and becoming immersed into the Light of Infinite Tao. Then luck and happiness result from affliction.

As we can see, happiness and unhappiness give birth to each other...

The wise is always calm, gentle, and just. He does not want to take something away from others. He is selfless and does not harm anyone. He is honest and lives in harmony with Tao, with nature, and with other people.

He is bright but does not glitter.

When leaders do not install too many law restrictions,

People are happy,

Otherwise people are unhappy.

From
greater abundance, poverty follows,

From greater poverty, abundance will arise.

Thus the middle way is the best.

The
Wise Person follows the middle way,

He is himself a live example.

He does not push his will, thus people follow him,

Correct in actions, good results are achieved.

He follows discipline, but tolerant with others,

People will notice his contentment.

When
governance is stifled the people will be wholesome. When governance is exacting,
the people will be shifty. Good fortune depends on disaster, and disaster [in
turn] is concealed in good fortune. Who knows the end [of this cyclical process]
or [the extent of] its irregularity? The straightforward changes into guile.
Good changes into what is pernicious. This has indeed baffled people for a long
time. For this reason the Sage squares yet does not cut. He is probing yet does
no one injury. He is straight and yet does not force things into line. He is
radiant and yet does not dazzle.

When the government is sluggish and dull,

The people are honest and content;

When the government is discriminating and exacting,

The people are wily and restless.

Calamity is what good fortune depends on.

Good fortune is what calamity hides in.

Who knows their utmost?

Is it not better to have no rectitude?

Rectitude returns to trickery;

And goodness returns to evil.

The people's delusion has long existed.

Therefore, the Sage is square but not cutting;

is honest but does not hurt;

is straight but does not bully;

is bright but does not shine.

Cultivating the Center

If the administration is subdued,

The people are sincere.

If the administration is exacting,

The people are deficient.

Misfortune! Good fortune supports it.

Good Fortune! Misfortune hides within.

Who knows where it ends?

Is there no order?

Order can revert to the unusual;

Good can revert to teh abnormal;

And people indeed are bewildered

For a long, long time.

Thus Evolved INdividuals are

Square without dividing;

Honest without offending;

Straightforward without straining;

Bright without dazzling.

People ruled with an iron fist are depressed and plan revolt. People who live among a charitable leader have no fears. Live, as you would want your country to live.

Listlessly govern:

Happy your people;

Govern exactingly:

Restless your people.

"Bad
fortune will

Promote the good;

Good fortune, too,

Gives rise to the bad."

But
who can know to what that leads?

For it is wrong and would assign

To right the strangest derivations

And would mean that goodness

Is produced by magic means!

Has man thus been so long astray?

Accordingly,
the Wise Man

Is square but not sharp,

Honest but not malign,

Straight but not severe,

Bright but not dazzling.

When the government is generous, the people will be honest and loyal;

When the government is severe, the people will complain.

O Misery! Happiness lies by its side;

O Happiness! Misery lurks beneath it.

Who knows the destination?

There is no master indeed.

The normal can at anytime become the abnormal,

The good can at anytime become the evil.

The delusion of the people (on this point) has persisted for a long time.

Therefore the sages is right as a square, but not stiff, has edges, but cuts nobody.

He is straightforward, but not aggressive, bright, but not dazzling.

When the government is completely muddled, the common folk become pure and simple.

When the government conducts meticulous scrutiny, the common folk become devious and inscrutable.

It is on disaster that good fortune depends;

it is in good fortune that disaster lurks.

Who understands what the very best is?

It is to have no government at all!

Correctness turns into perversion.

Goodness turns into deviancy.

The people's confusion has certainly lasted a long time.

This is why the sage is square but does not cut,

He is pointed but does not stab.

He is straight but does not align.

He is bright but does not shine.

1. When the government is muddled and confused,

2. The people are genuine and sincere.

3. When the government is discriminate and clear,

4. The state is crafy and cunning.

[4a
Disaster is that on which good fortune depends.]

5. Good fortune is that in which disaster's concealed.

6. Who knows where it will end?

7. For there is no [fixed] "correct."

8. The "correct" turns into the "deviant";

9. And "good" turns into "evil."

10. People's state of confusion

11. Has certainly existed for a long time.

12. Therefore be square but don't cut;

13. Be sharp but don't stab;

14. Be straightforward but not unrestrained;

15. Be bright but don't dazzle.

When a nation
is ruled

with a light touch,

people lead simple lives.

When a government

is harsh and demanding,

people will spend their time

trying to outsmart it.

Happiness is
rooted in misery,

and misery lurks beneath all joy.

Who knows what could happen tomorrow?

Everything is
relative;

what's considered proper today

may become improper.

Correct appearances

may hide dishonesty and sinfulness.

No wonder so
many people get confused.

The Masters
have sharp minds,

not sharp tongues.

They are austere,

but never judgmental.

They are straightforward,

but not provocative.

They are brilliant,

but not flashy.

.

Results of Process

When the government is relaxed, people are happy.

When the government is strict, people are anxious.

Good fortune leans on bad fortune;

bad fortune hides behind good fortune.

Who knows the results of process?

Is there no justice?

When the just become unjust, goodness becomes evil.

People have been deluded for a long time.

Therefore the wise are square but not cornered,

sharp but not cutting, straight but not strained,

brilliant but not dazzling.

The less administration the more beneficial is the harmony.

The more administration the more unpleasant confusion grows.

Trusting letting-go produces agreement and happiness.

Decisive attempt at control causes disagreement and misfortune.

One who does not give thought to what he does turns order into disorder fortune into misfortune enlightenment into blinding and dazzling.

How different is the Sage:

He is just without judging.

He guides without regulating.

He is a model without deforming.

He shines without blinding.

An Easy Government

Lao Tze says,

When the government is dull and drowsy, its people are simple and sincere.

When the government is sharp and shrewd, its people are dishonest and deceitful.

Disaster is that by which side fortune is to be found.

Fortune is that beneath which disaster lurks.

Who would be able to know its ultimate results?

If a king of men cannot dispense with correction, correct subjects will in their turn become distorted, and a good government will in its turn become evil.

The delusion of the ruler on this point has indeed subsisted for a long time.

Therefore the sage inherits correctitude like a square symbol, but punishes no one.

He inherits honest property, but tells no tales.

He is straightforward, but allows himself no license.

He is bright, but does not dazzle.

TRANSFORMATIONS ACCORDING TO CIRCUMSTANCES

When
the hand of the ruler is light,

the people do not contrive,

but when the country is severely ruled,

the people grow in cunning.

The
actions of the sage are sharp,

but they are never cutting,

they are pointed, though never piercing,

they are straightforward, not contrived,

and not without restraint,

brilliant but not blinding.

This is the action of the sage,

because he is aware

that where happiness exists,

there is also misery and strife;

that where honesty may be found,

there is occasion for dishonesty,

and that men may be beguiled.

The
sage knows that no-one can foretell

just what the future holds.

If a country is governed with tolerance,

the people are comfortable and honest.

If a country is governed with repression,

the people are depressed and crafty.

When the will to power is in charge,

the higher the ideals, the lower the results.

Try to make people happy,

and you lay the groundwork for misery.

Try to make people moral,

and you lay the groundwork for vice.

Thus the Master is content

to serve as an example

and not to impose her will.

She is pointed, but doesn't pierce.

Straightforward, but supple.

Radiant, but easy on the eyes.

Modest, and modest will be the government, then prosperous, and prosperous will be the people!

Shrewd will be the government, then discontented, and discontented will be the people!

Catastrophe rests upon fortune.

Fortune underlies catastrophe.

Who knows the ultimate answers?

What is normal soon becomes abnormal.

What is auspicious soon becomes ominous.

Do away with dogmatism!

Indeed, it is a long, long time ago since Man lost his way of Dao!

Therefore, a Sage is:

solidly square but has no sharp corners;

purely austere but not harmful;

straightly upright but not offensive;

humbly modest but not submissive;

and harmoniously bright but not dazzling.

When the government is silent, people are sincere.

When the government is intrusive, the state is decisive.

Disaster is what fortune depends upon,

Fortune is what disaster subdues.

Who knows a final outcome?

There is no right lawfulness.

Justice tends towards the extreme.

Kindness tends towards evil.

People have been familiar with this for a long time.

So,

Be rounded without cutting.

Be compatible without puncturing.

Be straightforward without trapping.

Be bright without dazzling.

LVIII

Government
is only sincere when it has no end in mind

Let it be discriminating and clear, and it will be cunning and sly

It uses disaster to create its own good fortune

Uses good fortune to conceal the disasters it creates

Who knows where this can lead?

When nothing is constant anymore

The natural is transformed into the deviant

The good is twisted into the evil

And the confusion will last for generations

Bring
order, but don't mold people to fit

Be conscientious, but not stifling

Be direct, but not aggressive

Be bright, but only bright enough that others can see their own way

When the Government Is Unobtrusive

When the government is unobtrusive,

the people are pure.

When the government is invasive,

the people are wanting.

Calamity is what fortune depends upon;

fortune is what calamity subdues.

Who knows how it will all end?

Is there no right and wrong?

The orthodox also becomes unorthodox,

the good also becomes ill;

people's confusion

is indeed long-standing.

Therefore sages are upright without causing injury,

honest without hurting,

direct but not tactless,

illumined but not flashy.

If the policy is liberal, people are honest.

If the policy is stringent, people play tricks.

Misfortune is where fortune can build upon.

Fortune is where misfortune can loom.

Who knows where is the extreme?

There is no such a thing as normal.

Normalcy can become an anomaly.

Good can become evil.

This has puzzled people for a long time.

This is why the sage is righteous yet not annoying.

He is just, yet not harsh.

He is outspoken, yet not offensive.

He is shiny, yet not glaring.

Where the government is dull, the people are simple.

Where the government is sharp, the people are deceitful.

Bad fortune is what good fortune leans on.

Good fortune is what bad fortune hides in.

Who knows the ultimate end of bad fortune and good fortune?

Is there the right?

The right changes into the strange.

The good changes into the monstrous.

Long indeed have the people been ignorant.

Therefore, the sage squares without cutting, sharpens without disfiguring, straightens without straining, enlightens without dazzling.

When the country is ruled with simple rules,

the people are simple.

When the country is ruled with complicated laws,

the people are cunning.

Misery often gives rise to future happiness.

Beneath happiness often lurks misery.

Who knows what the future holds?

Positive could be reversed.

Nothing stays positive forever.

Honesty becomes dishonest.

Goodness could become wicked.

People will be confused for a long time.

Therefore, the sage is righteous but not prejudging,

thrifty but not stingy,

straightforward but not unrestrained,

Brilliant but not blinding.

When the government is unseen

the people are simple and happy.

When the government is lively

the people are cunning and discontented.

On
misery perches happiness.

Beneath happiness crouches misery.

Who
knows when this will cease?

The straight changes into the crooked.

The good becomes the ominous.

Surely the people

have been confused for a long time.

Therefore,
the True Person squares without cutting,

carves without hacking,

straightens without dislocating,

gives forth light without blinding.

When
politicians look depressed and inactive

people are satisfied and happy.

When politicians look happy and active

people are dissatisfied and depressed.

Bad times come after good times, good times after bad.

Few
have found it, but there is a creek that runs

neither hot nor cold, good nor bad, right nor wrong.

For
every straight there are two crookeds,

for every good two bads

what is the purpose of choosing one over the other?

who can make the necessary corrections?

Wise
person

reach the end without resorting to means

shape without cutting

mold without pressure

straighten without pulling

illumine without shining.

When the government is non-discriminative, lazy and dull, the people are contented
and not spoiled, but quite generous. When the ruler looks sullen or depressed,
the people will be happy and satisfied;

When the government is efficient and smart, searching and discriminative, the
people are discontented, disappointed and contentious. Even if the ruler looks
lively and self-assured the people will be carping and discontented.

Good
fortune leans on bad fortune and bad fortune could rest on good fortune. Latent
calamity is happiness, and sound happiness depends on some calamity. Fortune's
route is a disaster; fortune is hidden disaster.

Who knows when the limit will be reached? Who would be able to know the ultimate
results of good fortune?

They may be:

The normal will (in time) revert to deceitful.

There will hardly be any correctness (used to govern the world) any more.

The old correct will become the perverse again.

Some of the good we know of will again turn evil.

Few know it, but the people have been deluded for a long time.

Anyhow,
there's a bourn where there's neither right nor wrong. It's in a realm where
every straight is doubled by a crooked and every good by an ill. Surely mankind
has gone long enough astray?

Therefore
the wise man has firm, square principles. He is at times as pointed as a square,
but hardly cuts or pierces.

His integrity is as acute as a knife but hardly cuts, hardly hurts (innocent
others), so "he shapes the corners without lopping",

He is indeed straight, but doesn't extend his sway. He reaches his [most cherished]
ends.

He is far from high-handed, he can be bright, but refrains from dazzling.

When government is anarchic, the people are honest;

When government is meddlesome, the state is lacking.

Disaster is that whereon good fortune depends,

Good fortune is that wherein disaster lurks.

Who knows their limits?

When there is no uprightness, correct reverts to crafty, good reverts to gruesome.

The delusion of mankind,

How long have been its days!

For this reason, be

Square but not cutting,

Angular but not prickly,

Straight but not arrogant,

Bright but not dazzling.

A free and generous government gives the people a chance to develop.

When a government is rigid and exacting the people are cramped and miserable.

Misery is but the shadow of happiness.

Happiness is but the cloak of misery.

When will there be an end to them?

If we dispense with rectitude, distortion will assert itself; and what was good in its way will give place to what is evil.

Verily the people have been under a cloud for a long time.

Therefore the wise man is full of rectitude, but he does not chirp and carve at others.

He is just, but he does not admonish others.

He is upright, but he does not straighten others.

He is enlightened, but he does not offend with his brightness.

Accept Things as They Are

You cannot force each other

to be or feel a certain way.

If you insist on happiness

you create misery.

If you insist on achievement

you create failure.

If you insist on a certain behavior

you insure its opposite.

But your complete acceptance

creates serenity and comfort,

and your straightforwardness

creates security and honesty.

Give each other the freedom

to experience and to feel whatever comes.

If your beloved is sad, or angry, or afraid

don't be threatened by those feelings.

Let them just be there,

part of the reality of the moment.

If your beloved errs or fails, accept these things as well.

In every mood or circumstance

let your love be tender and constant.

When the government is non-discriminative and dull, The people are
contented and generous. When the government is searching and
discriminative, The people are disappointed and contentious.

Calamity is that upon which happiness depends; Happiness is that in which calamity is latent.

Who knows when the limit will be reached? Is there no correctness
(used to govern the world)? Then the correct again becomes the perverse.
And the good again will become evil. The people have been deluded for a
long time.

Therefore the sage is as pointed as a square but does not pierce. He
is as acute as a knife but does not cut. He is as straight as an unbent
line but does not extend. He is as bright as light but does not dazzle.

The less a leader
does and says

The happier his people,

The more a leader struts and brags

The sorrier his people.

Often what appears to be unhappiness is happiness

And what appears to be happiness is unhappiness.

Who can see what leads to what

When happiness appears and yet is not,

When what should he is nothing but a mask

Disguising what should not be? Who can but ask

An end to such a stupid plot!

Therefore a sound man shall so square the circle

And circle the square as not to injure, not to impede:

The glow of his life shall not daze,

It shall lead.

When the government is low-key, the people are sturdy and simple;

When the government is harsh, the people are selfish and heartless.

Fortune is followed by disaster,

Disaster is followed by fortune.

Who knows the ultimate outcome of this cycle? No one knows.

The straight can become crooked; the kind can become wicked.

People have not figured out this puzzle for a long time.

So the great men were square but not rigid, self-abstaining but did not hurt people, upright but not blunt, glowing but not blinding.

When the government is inwardly contained and disciplined,

The people become wholesome and good.

When the government is outwardly demanding and exacting,

The people become tense and cunning.

Fortune rests on misfortune.

Misfortune hides in fortune.

There is no end to their perpetual cyclic interchange.

Likewise, there is nothing that is permanently fitting.

What is fitting eventually becomes unfitting.

What is proper eventually becomes improper.

Not knowing the complementarity inherent in cyclic interchange,

People's delusion of permanence tends to last for a long time.

Thus, knowing the dynamic balance existing in complementarity,

The sage chooses what is right without being divisive,

Points out what is true without being critical,

Straightens out distortions without overextending them,

Enlightens others without dazzling them.

If the government seems dark and tolerant,

The people will be honest and friendly;

If the government seems bright and sophisticated,

The people will be sly and cold-hearted.

What is bad goes with what is good;

What is good lies in what is bad.

Who can tell the exact difference

When all factors are considered?

The positive changes into the negative

And the negative changes into the positive.

Changing over and over again is the action of evil souls.

Such action has long been a confusing force in the world.

The wise person therefore prefers to be a simple square

That points in no directions,

A cutting tool that has no edge,

A straight line that goes nowhere,

And a light source that causes no fire.

When a government is unobtrusive and tolerant the people will be happy and prosperous;

when a government is suspicious and strict the people are dissatisfied and crafty.

Good fortune is linked to calamity; misery is tied to happiness.

So who can tell when the end of this will come?

Is there no measuring-stick for the norm?

What is seen now as right and true will certainly someday be seen as wrong and false.

The people have labored under this sea of vexations for a long time.

Therefore the Master is square without sharp cutting corners.

His straightness is not strained; he is pointed without being piercing.

And he is bright but not blinding.

