===== Chapter 35 =====

Hold the Great Shape in your hands.

The world departs.

Departs and does not harm—

Peaceful and leveled to the extreme.

[For] music and dumplings

Do the passing travelers stop.

But the going forth of the Tao is insipid to the mouth

From its being without flavor.

Inspecting it is not sufficient to see it.

Listening for it is not sufficient to hear it.

Using it is not sufficient to exhaust it.

Hold the great elephant - The great image - And the world moves. Moves without danger in safety and peace.

Music and sweets Make passing guests pause.

But the Tao emerges Flavourless and bland. Look - you won't see it.
Listen - You won't hear it. Use it - You will never use it up.

Embrace the great idea

And the whole world will come to you.

It'll come to you and suffer no harm.

It'll find no peril but contentment and peace.

Travelers stop for food and for music

Yet it is said of Tao

That it is tasteless and bland.

When you look at it, there's not enough of it to see.

When you listen to it, there's not enough of it to hear.

Yet, when you use it, you can't use it up.

TAO PRESENCE

Tao presence in mind,

Quietude, comfort and harmony appear.

As music pleasures the soul -

As fine food delights the senses -

Passing strangers take note, pause to enjoy.

Compare then the Tao -

Flavorless to the taste.

Unseen to the eye.

Unheard to the ear.

Tho' using it - it is inexhaustible.

Take hold of and follow Heaven below's (the sacred body's) elephant*.

Follow and there will be no loss, quiet peace is in abundance.

Food and music will make passing strangers stop.

The Tao that goes forth by words is tasteless!

It is without taste.

Those who think about it cannot see it.

Those who listen for it cannot hear it.

Use it and it can never be exhausted.

* Elephant: a symbol of strength, peace and abundance.

THE GOOD WILL OF THE TEH

The whole world is drawn to him that hath the likeness of the Tao.

Men flock unto him, and suffer no ill, but gain repose, find

peace, enjoy all ease.

Sweet
sounds and cates lure the traveler from his way. But the Word of

the Tao; though it appear harsh and insipid, unworthy to hearken or to

behold; hath his use all inexhaustible.

To him who holds in his hands the Great Image (of the invisible Tao),the whole world repairs. Men resort to him, and receive no hurt, but (find)rest, peace, and the feeling of ease.

Music and dainties will make the passing guest stop (for a time).

But though the Tao as it comes from the mouth, seems insipid and hasno flavour, though it seems not worth being looked at or listened to, theuse of it is inexhaustible.

For one who beholds the perfect arrangement of things

Everything falls in its rightful place

Nothing can harm him, and rest and peace will fall to him

Along the way there are travellers who yield music and feasts

Because the road to self-knowledge is acrid and unpleasant

Not pleasant to face

Painful to hear

But giving an inexhaustible strength

He who grasps the ultimate structure of reality draws everyone to him. They approach him without being harmed, but find security, satisfaction, and contentment.

Particular goods of various kinds attract the interests of men as they travel through life.

But the all-pervasive way of Nature attracts no attention to itself (for its true nature is not found to be in particulars). Even though it is present in the mouth, it remains untasted. Even though it is embedded in all objects, it remains unseen. Even though it permeates sound, it remains unheard. Yet, no matter how much we use it, it can never be exhausted.

He who holding the Great From goes about his work in the empire

Can go about his, yet do no harm.

All is peace, quietness and security.

Sound of music, smell of good dishes

Will make the passing stranger pause.

How difference the words that Tao gives forth!

So thin, so flavourless!

If one looks for Tao, there is nothing solid to see;

If one listens for it, there is nothing loud enough to hear.

Yet if one uses it, it is inexhaustible.

Extol the great illusion

and the men of the world will gather.

Talk of success, security and happiness

and the multitudes will flock.

Offer music and tasty food and travelers will stop in.

Talk of Tao has no flavor.

Look for it--there is nothing to see.

Listen for it--there is nothing to hear.

Merge with it--there is no boundary or end.

Grasp the big picture

(All) under heaven make progress

Make progress while doing no harm

Security and peace abound

(For) music along with fine food

The passing stranger will linger

(But) the way, as expressed in words

How insipid! It has no flavor

Look at it, there is nothing to satisfy the sight

Listen for it, there is nothing to satisfy the hearing

(But) use it, is not about to be used up

Peace

Hold on to the Great Image

And the whole world will come to you.

Come to you and suffer no harm;

But rather know great safety and peace.

Music and food -

For these passing travelers stop.

Therefore, of the Tao speaking, we say:

Insipid, it is ! It is lack of flavor.

When you look at it, it is not sufficient to be seen.

When you listen to it, it is not sufficient to be heard.

Yet when you use it, it can't be used up.

Stay centered in the Tao and the world comes to you: Comes, and isn't harmed; Comes, and finds contentment.

Most travelers are drawn to music and good food.

When Tao is talked about, the words can seem bland and flavourless. Looked at, it may not catch the eye. Listened to, it might not seduce the ear. Used, it can never be exhausted.

Take to your heart

The hand of the great Cosmic Teacher,

And your deepest true nature

Will arise in a peace beyond harm-

Joyfully harmonizing with the eternal abundance.

The wanderer tarries at the lilt of a song

Or the smell of good cooking;

But the lyric from the Cosmic Breath

Falls flat upon the ear,

As its words are flavorless to the tongue.

The eye can scarce perceive it,

The ear discerns only the echo-

For it lies deep within,

And you never get tired of using it.

The world will follow, without fear of evil,

serene, peaceful, secure,

one who follows the great symbol of Yin-Yang.

Music
and good food will stop the passing stranger,

but Tao, offered by the spoken word,

seems unappealing, tasteless.

Looked
for, it cannot be seen;

listened for, it cannot be heard;

applied, it cannot be exhausted.

Apprehend the inimitable conception, you attract the world; coming it receives no harm, but it tranquil, peaceful, satisfied.

Like transient guests, music and dainties pass away.

The Tao entering the mouth is insipid and without flavour; when looked at it evades sight; when listened for it escapes the ear – (yet) its operations are interminable.

To him who holds to the Great Form all the world will go. It will go and see no danger, but tranquillity, equality and community.

Music and dainties will make the passing stranger stop.

But Tao when uttered in words is so pure and void of flavour When one looks at it, one cannot see it; When one listens to it, one cannot hear it. However, when one uses it, it is inexhaustible. But we use it without end.

Great Guiding Signs?

Grasp great signs.

The social world moves.

If it move and does not harm,

the comfort and balance is supreme.

Concerts and feasts

bring passing guests to a halt.

Guidance coming out of the mouth.

Isn't it bland? It lacks flavor.

Looking at it, it is not visible.

Listen to it, it is not audible.

Use it, it is not applicable.

When one maintains the great image in dealing with the world,

One deals with the world without harming it.

Instead, one makes the world serene, tranquil, and peaceful.

Music and delicacies may attract passersby to remain momentarily,

But the taste of Tao is plain and without flavor.

Look at it, nothing can be seen.

Listen to it, nothing can he heard.

Employ it, it cannot be depleted.

Embrace the appearance of Tao.

Everyone under the great Heaven will follow it,

yet no one tries to cause harm to it.

Peace and safety and equality will arise.

Banquets and delicacies are like passing guests: they cannot last.

The Tao passes the mouth, it cannot be tasted.

The Tao passes the eyes, it cannot be seen.

The Tao passes the ears, it cannot be heard.

Yet it can never be exhausted by use.

Take hold of the great image,

And all under heaven will flock to you.

Once there, unharmed,

They will settle down in peace and prosperity.

Music and pastries

Make the wayfarers pause.

Therefore, when the Tao utters words,

They say: "How bland and tasteless!

Looked at,

It is not worth seeing;

Listened to,

Not worth hearing."

When used, however,

It is inexhaustible.

The person who holds the great thing

Will go through a whole world.

He will go along the path straightforwardly without seeing danger,

But finds tranquillity, friendship, and equality.

The sounds of a tune and the scent of delicacies will cause the stranger passing by to stop.

But Tao, when it is expressed in words, is pure, devoid of all taste.

When someone looks at it, he won't see it.

When someone listens to it, he won't hear it.

However, when someone uses it, it is everything.

Have in your hold the great image

And the empire will come to you.

Coming to you and meeting with no harm

It will be safe and sound.

Music and food

Will induce the wayfarer to stop.

The
way in its passage through the mouth is without flavor.

It cannot be seen,

It cannot be heard,

Yet it cannot be exhausted by use.

The Virtue of Benevolence

"Who holdeth fast to the great Form,

Of him the world will come in quest:

For there we never meet with harm,

There we find shelter, comfort, rest."

Music with dainties makes the passing stranger stop. But Reason, when coming from the mouth, how tasteless is it! It has no flavor. When looked at, there is not enough to be seen; when listened to, there is not enough to be heard. However, when used, it is inexhaustible.

The master being at one with the Tao doesn't feel threatened when in danger. Even if surrounded by misery he is perfectly peaceful. People are excited by the sound of music or the taste of food. But they find words which try to point out the Tao flavourless. If you try to look for it, it cannot be seen. If you try to listen for it, it cannot be heard. Experience it, and it never ceases.

Whoever embraces the Grand Image attracts people in the world.

Attracting but not discriminating, they live in peace.

Hearing music and seeing food, visitors linger.

Direction, [as a subject] for discussion, is plain and flavorless.

Looking at it, it is invisible;

Listening to it, it is inaudible;

using it, it is inexhaustible.

Holding to the great image all beneath heaven sets out:

sets out free of risk, peace tranquil and vast.

Music and savory food

entice travelers to stop,

but the Way uttered forth

isn't even the thinnest of bland flavors.

Look at it: not enough to see.

Listen to it: not enough to hear.

Use it: not enough to use up.

Whoever has a firm hold on the big form,

The entire world will follow him.

They will experience no harm,

But security, peace and comfort.

Having food and music,

Even passers-by stop.

Talking about Tao is tasteless and plain.

And it is:

Invisible by looking;

Inaudible by listening and

Inexhaustible by using.

Take
hold of the great form

The world comes toward

Comes toward without harm

Peace and stability in the extreme.

Music
and handing out dainties

Passing guests stop

Things belonging with tao expressed

Its blandness is equal to its lack of flavor.

Observing
lacks enough sight

Listening lacks enough hearing

Using lacks enough grasp.

Because he resembles the great prototype (the Principle, through his disinterested devotion), all come to the Sage. He welcomes them all, does them good, and gives them rest, peace, and happiness.

Music and good cheer may hold up a passer-by for but a night, (since sensual pleasures are fleeting and leave nothing behind).

Whereas the exposition of the great principle of disinterested devotion, simple and gentle, which charms neither the eyes nor the ears, pleases, engraves itself, and is of an inexhaustible fecundity in matters of practical application.

Hold the great image

The world will come

They come without harm, in harmonious peace

Music and food, passing travelers stop

The Tao that is spoken out of the mouth

Is bland and without flavor

Look at it, it cannot be seen

Listen to it, it cannot be heard

Use it, it cannot be exhausted

When we hold the great image of the Tao, the world will come into a state of harmonious peace.

Rough Draft of notes

Holding to the Great Form

All pass away.

They pass away unharmed, resting in Great Peace.

It is for food and music that the passing traveler stops.

When the Tao appears from its opening

It is so subtle, it has no taste.

Look at it, you cannot see it.

Listen, you cannot hear it.

Use it

You cannot exhaust it.

Apprehend the inimitable conception, you attract the world; coming it receives no harm, but is tranquil, peaceful, satisfied.

Like transient guests, music and dainties pass away.

The Tao entering the mouth is insipid and without flavor; when looked at it evades sight; when listened for it escapes the ear - (yet) its operations are interminable.

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF BENEVOLENCE

The world will go to him who grasps this Great Principle; they will seek and not be injured, they will find contentment, peace and rest.

Music and dainties attract the passing people, while Tao's reality seen-is insipid. Indeed it has no taste, when looked at there is not enough seen to be prized, when listened for, it can scarcely be heard, but, the use of it is inexhaustible.

Hold aloft the Great Image (hsiang),

The whole world will go to it.

Going to it, they will meet with no harm,

Only safety, peace, and contentment (an p'ing t'ai).

When music and dainty dishes are offered,

The passers-by stop.

Tao, when it is uttered by the mouth,

Is so bland it has no flavor.

When looked at, it is not enough to be seen.

When listened to, it is not enough to be heard,

When used (yung), it is inexhaustible.

The world will follow, without fear of evil, serene, peaceful, secure, one who follows the great symbol of Yin-Yang.

Music and good food will stop the passing stranger, but Tao, offered by the spoken word, seems unappealing, tasteless.

Looked for, it cannot be seen; listend for, it cannot be heard; applied, it cannot be exhausted.

Kapitel nicht vorhanden / chapter not available

Thirty-five

All men will come to him who keeps to the one,

For there lie rest and happiness and peace.

Passersby may stop for music and good food,

But a description of the Tao

Seems without substance or flavor.

It cannot be seen, it cannot be heard,

And yet it cannot be exhausted.

He who holds the great image (Tao)

Attracts all the people to him.

Coming to him and not harming each other,

They all live in peace and happiness.

Music and food

Can allure passersby to stop,

But the Tao, coming out of the mouth,

Is tasteless.

It cannot be seen,

It cannot be heard,

But when using it, you can never exhaust its use.

Holding fast to the great form,

Go anywhere under Heaven.

Wherever you go, nothing will harm you -

You will be safe and in peace.

Music and fine food

Make the passing stranger stop.

When Tao comes out from the mouth,

How flavorless it is!

You look at it, but it is invisible.

You listen to it, but it is inaudible.

You use it, but it is inexhaustible.

When the ruler follows the way of Dao,

People will flock to him.

They become the beneficiaries and enjoy peace and harmony.

Beautiful music and sumptuous foods allure all passers-by.

They linger and then decide to stay.

How is Dao best described?

Dao is tasteless, invisible and inaudible,

But its use is inexhaustible.

Virtue of Benevolence

Ren Teh

Hold fast to the Great Form,

And wherever in the world you go,

You will meet with no harm,

But enjoy security, peace, and well-being.

Where there is music with good food,

The passers-by will pause and linger.

But Tao, on being set forth orally,

Is insipid and tasteless.

It is invisible when looked at,

And inaudible when listened to,

Yet its utility will never come to an end.

Hold fast to the Great Idea, the Formless Form that is the Tao, and all men will come to you.

In you they will see no danger and meet no harm.

In you they will find stillness, safety, and peace.

Pleasant music and the smell of savoury dishes cause passing strangers pasing by to linger.

But how pure, how lacking in savour, are the utterances of the Tao!

Look for the Tao, and you see nothing!

Listen for the Tao, and there is nothing to be heard!

But use it, and you will find that it is inexhaustible.

Hold to the great symbol:

All beneath heaven will follow,

Follow without harm,

Quiet, even, secure.

Music and dainties

Make passing guests pause.

But Tao is bland and without taste.

Looked at, it can't be seen;

Listened to, it can't be heard;

Used, it can't be used up.

When the subtle Way of the universe is taught, people know where to go and what to learn,

because they know that they will not be harmed but will receive great peace.

The teacher of the universal Way is like one who gives real food to people.

He does not feed them colorful bait with the intention of catching them.

The subtle Way of the universe is flavorless, with nothing much to offer the mouth.

Neither does it offer much to be enjoyed by the eyes or entertain the ears, yet its usefulness is inexhaustible.

XXXV.

The
Kernel of Virtue

Lay hold
of the Great Form of Tao!

And
the world will follow your train,

It
will follow along, and suffer no wrong,

And
in peace and content remain.

For
music and dainties offered at your gate

The
passing guest will tarry awhile and wait.

Though
Tao in passing is tasteless,

With
nothing to fill the eye,

And
with nothing to hear worth filling the ear,

You
can use it exhaustlessly.

Hold fast the idea of "The Great,"

Then all men will be drawn to you.

They will come to you and receive no hurt,

But rest, peace and great calm.

When you provide music and exquisite food

The traveller will stay with you gladly.

When the Tao flows out from you to him

By his palate he does not detect its savour,

By his eye he cannot perceive it,

By his ears he cannot hear it,

But in using it he finds it to be inexhaustible.

Who
holds to the Great Pattern

will
attract all things to them.

They
go to them and

receive
no harm,

in
them they find

peace,

security
and

happiness.

Music
and

snacks
can only

make
a passing guest pause.

The
words of Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

have
lasting effects,

They
are mild and

flavorless,

We
look and see nothing.

We
listen and hear nothing.

But
if we use it,

It
is without end.

To him who holds the great Image, All-under-heaven will resort.

Those who resort to him, will suffer no harm, but will dwell in peace and union (with heaven and earth).

Music and dainties will make a passing stranger halt his steps.

But the words which are uttered about the Way, - how insipid and without flavour are they!

Looked at, it is not worth seeing.

Listened to, it is not worth hearing.

But used, it cannot be exhausted!

To him who holds in his hands the Great Image (of the invisible

Tao), the whole world repairs. Men resort to him, and receive no

hurt, but (find) rest, peace, and the feeling of ease.

Music
and dainties will make the passing guest stop (for a time).

But though the Tao as it comes from the mouth, seems insipid and has

no flavour, though it seems not worth being looked at or listened to,

the use of it is inexhaustible.

Hold fast to the Great Imagery, and all under Heaven will come;
they
will come and not be harmed by contact with your Libido;
they will rest in
safety and peace;
music and fine food will make the passerby halt.

Therefore,
when THOU art expressed in mere words,
people say 'how bland and tasteless
it is!'
"We look for it, but there is not enough to be seen!"
'We listen
for it, but there is not enough to be heard.'
Yet,
when put to use, it is inexhaustible!

Totality
will be with you

If you can see the simple presence

Although there's danger all around

You give complete acceptance

Good
music, food and company

Are welcome when you're traveling

The inner truth seems tasteless

Yet it produces everything

You
look and you see nothing

You listen and hear silence

Its use is inexhaustible

It's ever worthy of reliance

HE who holds the Great Symbol will attract all things to him.

They flock to him and receive no harm, for in him they find peace, security and happiness.

Music and dainty dishes can only make a passing guest pause.

But the words of Tao possess lasting effects,

Though they are mild and flavourless,

Though they appeal neither to the eye nor to the ear.

The wise seek solace in the Tao,

Wherever they go they find comfort and succor that may be extended to others who seek.

A feast with roasting foods and spirited music may detain a traveler.

But words speaking of the Tao seem bland and dull.

Looked for nothing will be seen,

Listened for, nothing will be heard.

But when you use it, it will never diminish.

She who follows the way of the Tao

will draw the world to her steps.

She can go without fear of being injured,

because she has found peace and tranquility in her heart.

Where
there is music and good food,

people will stop to enjoy it.

But words spoken of the Tao

seem to them boring and stale.

When looked at, there is nothing for them to see.

When listen for, there is nothing for them to hear.

Yet if they put it to use, it would never be exhausted.

Do not get carried away by the group process.

Stick to the single principle. Then you can do good work, stay free from chaos and conflicts, and feel present in all situations.

The superficial leader cannot see how things happen, even though the evidence is everywhere. This leader is swept up by drama, sensation, and excitement. All this confusion is blinding.

But the leader who returns again and again to awareness-of-process has a deep sense of how things happen. This leader has a simple time of it. The sessions flow smoothly, and when the group ends, the leader is still in good spirits.

Whoever holds firmly to following the Tao

Wil draw All the World to herself.

She may go anywhere and not be afraid,

Finding only safety, balance and peace.

Music and good food lure passers-by

But words about the Tao

Seem bland and flavorless to them.

Look, and it cannot be seen.

Listen, and it cannot be heard.

Use it, and it cannot be exhausted.

All
beings are drawn to those who stay centered

in their oneness with Infinity

because they flow in peace and

harmony.

The
manifestations of music and delicious food

catch the attention of those passing by.

But the essence of Infinity goes unnoticed.

It
makes no sound and has no flavor

and yet It is the inexhaustible source

of the manifestations of all sounds

and all flavors.

Remember this pervasive image;

Falling from Heaven, falling unharmed, is the Great Peace.

Pleasure and Enticements tempt the passing visitor.

seems empty, mild, and without flavor.

Look, and there is nothing to see.

Listen, and there is nothing to hear.

Apply it, and there is no end.

To he who holds the great image,

The whole world will come.

They will come and meet with no harm,

Finding safety, tranquillity and comfort.

Music and food will induce the passer-by to stop,

But when the Tao is spoken of in words, it seems bland and tasteless.

Looked for, it cannot be seen.

Listened for, it cannot be heard.

Use it, and it can never be exhausted.

The owner of the biggest image attracts the whole world.

When all who come have been safely settled,

The world will then be peaceful.

Melodious music and delicious food

Can only attract passers-by.

But the Way is, when put into one's mouth, tasteless,

When looked at, colorless,

When listened to, uninteresting,

And, when used, limitlessly bountiful.

Grasp the Great Image and the world will come it will come and not be harmed - a great peace and evenness.

or music and cakes, passing strangers stop

Tao flowing from the lips - flat. No taste to it. Look for it: you will not be satisfied looking listen for it: you will not be satisfied listening put it into practice: you will not be satisfied stopping.

Into the Great Tao merge all the Perfect Ones.

Follow you too this path! By doing so you will not harm yourself; on the contrary, you will achieve calm, harmony, and the fullness of life.

I, in the state of non-doing, travel in the Infinity of Tao. One cannot convey this with words! Tao is the Most Subtle and Blissful!

Being on the Tao Way all creatures

Go on the natural path.

On the Way there is harmony, health, peace and happiness.

He who encounters them will want to stay.

But the Tao Way is much deeper,

Transcends all the five senses.

Grasp
the great Image and [all in] the world will approach. They approach and are
not injured, thus great is their peace and tranquility. When there is music
and food, the passing travellers will stop in. [But] the Dao when expressed
in words is found bland and flavorless, when looked at provides nothing to see,
when listened to provides nothing to hear. [Yet] when put into use, there is
no way to exhaust it.

Hold on to the great image

And the whole world will follow.

Following without harm, in safety, peace, and comfort.

Music and viand will cause the traveler to stop.

But Tao spoken by mouth is flavorless and bland.

Looked at, it cannot be seen.

Listened to, it cannot be heard.

Used, it will never be exhausted.

Sensing the Insensible

Hold fast to the Great Image,

And all the world will come.

Yet its coming brings no harm,

Only peace and order.

When there is music together with food,

The audience will linger.

But when the Tao is expressed,

It seems without substance or flavor.

We observe and there is nothing to see.

We listen and there is nothing to hear.

We use it and it is without end.

When you look into a deep well, you see nothing. Put your ear to it and you hear nothing. Try to smell it and again there is nothing. It would seem a useless thing. Until you use it.

Once grasp the great Form without form,

And you roam where you will

With no evil to fear,

Calm, peaceful, at ease.

At
music and viands

The wayfarer stops.

But the Way, when declared,

Seems thin and so flavorless!

It
is nothing to look at

And nothing to hear;

But used, it will prove

Inexhaustible.

Whoever holds fast to the great image will become that one to whom all people under Heaven will come.

(Even if all people under Heaven) come to him they will not hinder each other,

And all enjoy comfort, peace and health.

Music and dainties will make passing guests stop,

(But) Tao, if spoken out, will be insipid and tasteless.

Being looked at, it is imperceptible,

Being listened to, it is inaudible,

Being utilized, it is inexhaustible.

Grasp the great image, and all under Heaven will turn to you.

Turning to you means not harm but safety and peace in great measure.

Music and fine food make the passing visitor stay.

When the Dao is spoken of, how bland: it has no flavor at all!

We look for it, but not enough is there to see anything.

We listen for it, but not enough is there to hear anything.

We try to use it, but not enough is there to use up.

1. Hold on to the Great Image and the whole world will come to you.

2. Come to you and suffer no harm; but rather know great safety and peace.

3. Music and food—for these passing travelers stop.

4. Therefore, of the Dao's speaking, we say:

5. Insipid, it is! It's lack of flavor.

6. When you look at it, it's not sufficient to be seen;

7. When you listen to it, it's not sufficient to be heard;

8. Yet when you use it, it can't be used up.

Get right with
Tao, and everybody wants to be your friend.

When they're around you, they enjoy a calm serenity.

People are often
distracted by music or good food.

But when we try to talk about Tao,

it seems awfully boring.

It doesn't look
like much.

It doesn't sound like much.

But no matter how much you use, there's still plenty left.

.

The Inexhaustible Way

Hold to the great form, and all the world follows,

following without meeting harm,

in health, peace, and happiness.

Music and delicacies to eat induce travelers to stay.

But the Way is mild to the taste.

Looked at, it is invisible.

Listened to, it is inaudible.

Applied, it is inexhaustible.

One who holds fast to the Great Symbol

Gains the whole world

Bestows purest peace

Serenity and bliss.

Yet the hasty wayfarer

Attracted only by outer chars

Tastes Tao and is not aware of it

Sees Tao and does not perceive it

Listens to Tao and does not hear it.

But whoever

Grasps and holds it

Amid impermanence

Is grasped by the permanent

And attains duration.

The Peace In The Tao

Lao Tze says,

When the king of men holds the great image, the whole world's people turn to rally round him.

When people turn to rally round him, and do not commit loss and harm, then the world shall become peaceful and secure.

He who takes delight in the Tao, and enjoys it, the true one will stay with him.

The Tao's teaching is as dry as a course of tasteless dish.

It cannot be seen, nor can't be heard.

However, it will never be exhausted in its application.

THE BENEVOLENT HOST

The
wise man acts at one with the Tao,

for he knows it is here that peace is found.

It is for this reason that he is sought.

Whilst
guests enjoy good music and food,

as these are supplied by a benevolent host,

a description of Tao seems without form,

for it cannot be heard and cannot be seen.

But when the music and food are all ended,

the taste of the Tao still remains.

She who is centered in the Tao

can go where she wishes, without danger.

She perceives the universal harmony,

even amid great pain,

because she has found peace in her heart.

Music or the smell of good cooking

may make people stop and enjoy.

But words that point to the Tao

seem monotonous and without flavor.

When you look for it, there is nothing to see.

When you listen for it, there is nothing to hear.

When you use it, it is inexhaustible.

He who holds fast to the superior model, the whole world may follow him without ado.

They follow him without harm, but with comfort, equality and prosperity.

Musical temptation and food's flavor can stop a traveler on the road.

When Dao is tasted by mouth, it is mild and without flavor.

When it is looked at, it cannot be entirely seen;

when it is listened to, it cannot be entirely heard;

and when it is taken, it cannot be eaten.

Holding on to the great Symbol,

The whole world carries on.

On and on without doing harm.

Being happy at peace,

Enjoying greatly the music and food,

Travelers stop by.

When the Tao is spoken forth plainly

It has no flavor at all.

Look, but that is not sufficient for seeing.

Listen, but that is not sufficient for hearing.

Use it, but it is not exhausted.

XXXV

Rest
in the tao and the whole world will come to you

They will suffer no harm, but find safety and peace

The
curious will stop where they see music and games and food

But will soon lose their taste for it and wander on

The tao, though, has no flavor, no color, no sound

It is easily missed, yet once found

It is inexhaustible

Holding the Great Image

When holding the Great Image,

the world goes on and on without harm,

peaceful, even, tranquil.

Where there is music and dining,

passing travelers stop;

but the issue of the Way

is so plain as to be flavorless.

When you look at it, it is invisible;

when you listen to it, it is inaudible;

when you use it, it cannot be exhausted.

Those who grasp Tao will be followed by the whole world.

Following without worries, the world becomes secure, peaceful, and prosperous.

Music and banquet make the travelers stop by.

But when Tao is said, it is plain and flavorless.

It is invisible when it is looked at.

It is inaudible when it is listened to.

It is inexhaustible when it is utilized.

He who holds the great image will attract all things to him.

They flock to him and receive no harm, for in him they find peace, security and happiness.

Music and dainty dishes make a passing guest pause.

But being said in the words, the Way is tasteless, flavorless, not seen, not heard, but it cannot be used up.

Up held the great sign (of Tao), all men come,

for safety, for peace, and for happiness.

Traveler stop for music and good food.

As for Tao, not flavor for mouth,

not beauty for eyes,

not good music for ears,

but use it and cannot be exhausted.

Hold on to the Great Image

and all under heaven will approach you.

Coming to you and not being harmed,

they will find rest, peace, and security.

A
passing guest will pause at the sound of music

and the smell of fancy food.

By comparison the Tao is mild and flavorless.

It is not solid enough to be seen,

nor loud enough to be heard.

Yet, it lasts forever.

The
person who follows the way

is invisible to others.

The earth is at one, quiet and peaceful.

Music, good smells, flashing lights

make people curious and want to stop.

Dao, though, is silent, tasteless,

and quite boring to the traveler.

Nothing
to see, nothing to hear,

nothing to read, ...

just a tiny pool of water

on the prairie

always there

doing nothing.

Hold the great symbol and great form of dao know-how. He who visualises or holds
the great symbol form at its best can go about his work (in such as his empire),
yet without doing harm. An then all the world follows. At last a lot of people
will come and meet no harm. All in peace, quietness and security, commonwealth.
All can enjoy comfort and health.

Sound of music, smell of good dishes will make the passing stranger pause. Yes,
offer music and dainties, very good things to eat and the [odd], passing and
wayfaring stranger will stays.

How
different the words that dao gives forth! So thin, insipid, so flavour- or tasteless!
Still dao is mild to the taste.

Looked at, it can't be seen. So look at dao; it's quite imperceptible. If one
looks for dao, there's hardly anything solid to see.

If one listens for it, there's nothing loud to hear. We listen to this inaudible
[thing].

If one uses it, its supply never fails. So use it; it's inexhaustible.

Hold fast to the great image and all under heaven will come;

They will come but not be harmed, rest in safety and peace;

Music and fine food will make the passerby halt.

Therefore,

When the Way is expressed verbally,

We say such things as

"how bland and tasteless it is!"

"We look for it, but there is not enough to be seen."

"We listen for it, but there is not enough to be heard."

Yet, when put to use, it is inexhaustible!

Attain to the Great Idea, and all the world will flock to you.

It will flock to you and will not be hurt therein, for it will rest in a wonderful peace.

Where there is a festival the wayfarer will stay.

To the palate the Tao is insipid and tasteless.

In regarding it the eye is not impressed.

In listening to it the ear is not filled.

But in its uses it is inexhaustible.

The Gift of Self

Let your only ambition be to let

your beloved see you clearly,

your fears, your hopes,

your scars, your dreams,

your joy, your sorrow,

your desires, your passions

and your innermost life.

This is giving the gift of self.

If you do not give this gift,

what is the use of giving any other?

What is more important,

finding each day a bit more truth

about each other;

or striving another day

to maintain an illusion?

How are you spending this day?

Hold fast to the great form (Tao), And all the world will come. They
come and will encounter no harm; But enjoy comfort, peace, and health.

When there are music and dainties, Passing strangers will stay.

But the words uttered by Tao, How insipid and tasteless! We look at
it; it is imperceptible. We listen to it; it is inaudible. We use it; it
is inexhaustible.

If the sign
of life is in your face

He who responds to it

Will feel secure and fit

As when, in a friendly place,

Sure of hearty care,

A traveler gladly waits.

Though it may not taste like food

And he may not see the fare

Or hear a sound of plates,

How endless it is and how good!

If you have the DAO, everything will come to you.

They come to you because they will not be hurt anymore, and they will become secure and peaceful.

Pleasant music and tasteful food will make even the passerby stop.

When being talked about, the DAO is tasteless.

When you look at it, you will not see it; when you listen to it, you will not hear it;

However, when you use it, it will never run out.

From the great formless imagining the world emerges into existence,

Without obstruction, but with balance, harmony, and peace.

Music and feast provide fleeting pleasures in this ephemeral world.

The Tao in its utterance brings no such pleasures to the senses.

The Tao, when looked at, cannot be seen by the eye.

The Tao, when listened to, cannot be heard by the ear.

Yet, when used, it is forever inexhaustible.

The owner of the biggest image attracts the whole world.

When all who come have been safely settled,

The world will then be peaceful.

Melodious music and delicious food

Can only attract passers-by.

But the Way is, when put into one's mouth, tasteless,

When looked at, colorless,

When listened to, uninteresting,

And, when used, limitlessly bountiful.

The wise seek solace in the Tao,

Wherever they go they find comfort and succor that may be extended to others who seek.

A feast with roasting foods and spirited music may detain a traveler.

But words speaking of the Tao seem bland and dull.

Looked for nothing will be seen,

Listened for, nothing will be heard.

But when you use it, it will never diminish.

