===== Chapter 36 =====

Should one wish to condense it, one must certainly expand it.

Should one wish to weaken it, one must certainly strengthen it.

Should one wish to abolish it, one must certainly boost it.

Should one wish to receive it, one must certainly give it.

This is called "subtle illumination."

The flexible and weak overcome the firm and strong.

Fish are not able to escape from the deeps—

The beneficial tools of the state

Are not able, therefore, to be shown to people.

To collect, first scatter. To Weaken, first strengthen. To abolish, first establish. To conclude, first initiate.

This is called subtle illumination. Soft and weak overcome stiff and strong.

Fish cannot escape the deep pool. A country's sharpest weapons Cannot be displayed.

If you wish to make something small

You have to expand it.

If you wish to make something weak

You have to strengthen it.

If you wish to make something fall

You have to promote it.

If you wish to make something gone

You have to provide it.

This is called

Darkening what's bright.

What's soft and weak defeats what's hard and strong.

Fish should not be taken away from the ocean.

Sharp weapons of the state

Should not be shown to the people.

THE SUBTLE LAW

Expansion grows from contraction.

Strength grows from weakness.

Construction grows from destruction.

Receiving grows from giving.

Being the subtle law of nature,

Softness and gentleness overcome the hard and the strong.

As fish are preserved by hiding in the deep,

Preserve your weapons of survival from the view of the Idle Curious.

To be at peace with your deep-seated desires, you surely must expand.

To soften your deep-seated desires, you surely must be vigorous.

To give up your deep-seated desires, you surely must flourish.

To deprive your deep-seated desires, you surely must give of yourself.

This is called the mystery of the light.

The gentle and the yielding overcome the hard and the forceful.

Force cannot separate you from your watery abyss (deep-seated desires).

The community's acquisitions cannot help you to know yourself.

THE HIDING OF THE LIGHT

In order to draw breath, first empty the lungs; to weaken another, first

strengthen him; to overthrow another, first exalt him; to despoil

another, first load him with gifts; this is called the Occult Regimen.

The
soft conquereth the hard; the weak pulleth down the strong.

The
fish that leaveth ocean is lost; the method of government must be

concealed from the people.

When one is about to take an inspiration, he is sure to make a (previous)expiration; when he is going to weaken another, he will first strengthenhim; when he is going to overthrow another, he will first have raised himup; when he is going to despoil another, he will first have made giftsto him:-this is called 'hiding the light (of his procedure).' The softovercomes the hard; and the weak the strong. Fishes should not be takenfrom the deep; instruments for the profit of a state should not be shownto the people.

Only what's stretched out can be pulled together

Only what's fortified can be weakened

Only what's increased can be decreased

Only one who has, can lose

That must be clear

Soft overcomes hard

Weak overcomes strong

Fishes belong in water

Weapons have to be destroyed

The purpose of contracting (returning to Nature) is served by expanding (emerging out of Nature in the first place). The purpose of weakening (subsiding or satisfying of desire) is served by strengthening (arousing the will to live). The purpose of decline (of individual self-assertion) is served by arising (of individuality). The purpose of taking away (culminating or perfecting life) is served by being given (ie., "the last of life for which the first was made").

This is the most penetrating insight into the way of life. The giving in or finishing always triumphs over the starting out.

Just as a fish should not be taken out of water, So a sword should never be taken from its scabbard.

What is in the end to be shrunk

Must first be stretched.

Whatever is to be weakened

Must begin by being made strong.

What is to be overthrown

Must begin by being set up.

He who would be a taker

Must begin as a giver.

This is called "dimming" one's light.

It is thus that the soft overcomes the hard

And the weak, the strong.

"It is best to leave the fish down in his pool;

Best to leave the State's sharpest weapons wherenone can see them."

If you want it to contract, let it expand.

If you want it to weaken, let it gain strength.

To bring a thing down, let it be raised high.

To bring a thing to you, let go.

This is called "perceiving the subtle workings."

Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.

A fish should not leave deep water.

A country should not show off its power.

When desiring to contract a thing

First be sure to expand it

When desiring to weaken a thing

First be sure to empower it

When desiring to abolish a thing

First be sure to promote it

When desiring to despoil a thing

First be sure to endow it

This may be called "subtle discernment"

The adaptable & gentle overcome the firm & strong

Fish should not be removed from the depths

The sharpest instruments of the state

Should not be for showing to others

Influence

If you wish to shrink it,

You must certainly stretch it.

If you wish to weaken it,

You must certainly strenghten it.

If you wish to desert it,

You must certainly work close with it.

If you wish to snatch something from it,

You must certainly give something to it.

This is called the Subtle Light.

The submissive and weak conquer the strong.

Fish should not be taken out of the depths;

The state's sharp weapons should not be displayed.

What is ultimately to be reduced must first be expanded . What is ultimately to be weakened must first be made strong. What is ultimately to be discarded must first be embraced. What is ultimately to be taken away must first be given.

This is called subtle insight.

The soft overcomes the hard. The weak overcomes the strong. The Tao should never be abandoned. Weapons should never be displayed.

Would you like to reduce it?

Then first see it inflated.

Would you like it to be weakened?

Then first see it as powerful.

Would you like to destroy it?

Then first see it enshrined.

Would you like to drain it?

Then first see it overflow.

This is called the subtle discernment:

Gently penetrating flexibility

Undermines the rigidity of power.

A fish can't swim

When it's out of its depth;

A nation can't survive

When it shows off its weaponry.

Govern Peacefully

That
which is to contract is first expanded.

That which is to weaken is first strengthened.

That which is to be felled is first reinforced.

This is subtle enlightenment.

Being
gentle overcomes strength.

As fish should not leave the deep,

so the sharp weapons of the state

should always be hidden from view.

When about to inhale it is certainly necessary to open the mouth; when about to weaken it is certainly necessary to strengthen; when about to discard it is certainly necessary to promote; when about to take away it is certainly necessary to impart - this is atomic perception.

The weak overcome the strong.

Fish cannot leave the deeps.

The innerness of the government cannot be shown to the people.

In order to contract a thing, one should surely expand it first. In order to weaken, one will surely strengthen first. In order to overthrow, one will surely exalt first. 'In order to take, one will surely give first'!

This is called subtle wisdom. The soft and weak can overcome the hard and strong.

As the fish should not leave the deep So should the sharp implements of a nation not be shown to anyone!

Natural Reversals

On the point of desiring to contract it,

you must regard it as inherently expanded.

On the point of desiring to weaken it,

you must regard it as inherently strong.

On the point of desiring to dissipate it,

you must regard it as inherently thriving.

On the point of desiring to steal it,

you must regard it as inherently belonging.

This is called minute discernment.

Soft and pliant triumph over hard and coercive.

Fish cannot leave the abyss.

The state's beneficial artifacts

cannot be shown to people.

That which is to be condensed must first be dispersed.

That which is to be enervated must first be vitalized.

That which is to be devastated must first be produced.

That which is to be obtained must first be yielded.

This is called invisible illumination.

The soft overcomes the unshakable;

The weak overcomes the strong.

Just as fish stay deep in the pond,

The best arms in the nation are those that remain invisible.

To gather things, one must first disseminate them.

To weaken things, one must first strengthen them.

To abolish things, one must first prevail upon them.

To seize things, one must first grant them.

That is what 'profound understanding' means.

The soft will overcome the hard.

The weak will overcome the strong.

The fish shall not leave deep waters.

The weapons of a country should not be displayed in public.

That which shall contract

Must have long expanded;

That which shall weaken

Must have long strengthened;

That which shall depart

Must have long partaken;

That which shall take

Must have long given.

This is called subtle insight.

Softness and weakness overcome strength:

Fish cannot leap out of deep water;

So cannot the state's sharp weapons

Be displayed to men.

In order to reduce something, it must first be expanded.

In order to weaken something, it must first be strengthened.

In order to drop something, it must first be lifted.

"In order to take, a man must first give."

This is what is called the wisdom of light.

The soft and weak can overcome the hard and strong.

Just as the fish should not leave the depths,

The sharp instruments of control should not leave their hiding-place.

If you would have a thing shrink,

You must first stretch it;

If you would have a thing weakened,

You must first strengthen it;

If you would have a thing laid aside,

You must first set it up;

If you would take from a thing,

You must first give to it.

This
is called subtle discernment:

The submissive and weak will overcome the hard and strong.

The
fish must not be allowed to leave the deep;

The instruments of power in a state must not be revealed to anyone.

The Secret's Explanation

That which is about to contract has surely been expanded. That which is about to weaken has surely been strengthened. That which is about to fall has surely been raised. That which is about to be despoiled has surely been endowed.

This is an explanation of the secret that the tender and the weak conquer the hard and the strong.

As the fish should not escape from the deep, so with the country's sharp tools the people should not become acquainted.

For something to expand, first it must shrink. To strengthen something, first it must be weakened. To raise something, first it must be lowered. To receive something, first you must give. This subtlety can be seen in all matters. The soft overcomes the hard. The subtle penetrates the obvious. Keep your inner development a secret, and the results will be clear.

Before contracting [an object], let it expand;

Before weakening [an object], let it solidify;

Before abandoning [an object], let it flourish;

Before seizing [an object], let it aggregate.

This is discernment at its micro best.

Tenderness overcomes bruteness.

Fish cannot survive away from water.

A state does not boast her weaponry before the people.

To gather

you must scatter.

To weaken

you must strengthen.

To abandon

you must foster.

To take

you must give.

This is called dusky enlightenment.

Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.

Fish should be kept in their watery depths:

a nation's honed instruments of power should be kept well-hidden from the people.

In order to contract it, first allow it to expand.

In order to weaken it, first allow it to strengthen;

In order to eliminate it, first allow it to grow;

In order to take away from it, first allow it to receive.

These are called common sense which includes:

The soft and weak overcome the hard and strong;

A fish should not leave deep water;

State's sharp weapons should not be shown to others.

Attain
the desire for inhaling

Firmly seed exhaling

Attain the desire of lessening

Firmly seed strengthening

Attain the desire of discarding

Firmly seed allowing back

Attain the desire of taking by force

Firmly seed giving away

Appropriately called subtle luminance.

Yielding
conquers the firm

Lessening conquers the strong.

Fish cannot escape relating to deep water

A direction for man cannot happen with tools benefitting a nation.

The beginning of contraction necessarily follows the maximum of expansion. Weakness follows strength, decadence follows prosperity, depravation follows opulence.

This is a subtle insight (that many do not wish to see). All preceding strength and superiority is expiated by subsequent debility and inferiority. More calls for less, excess calls for deficit.

A fish should not leave the depths (where it lives ignored but in security, in order to show itself at the surface where it could be harpooned). A state should not show its resources (if it does not wish the others to turn against it in order to crush it).

If one wishes to shrink it

One must first expand it

If one wishes to weaken it

One must first strengthen it

If one wishes to discard it

One must first promote it

If one wishes to seize it

One must first give it

This is called subtle clarity

The soft and weak overcomes the tough and strong

Fish cannot leave the depths

The sharp instruments of the state

Cannot be shown to the people

If we wish to reduce something, to make something smaller, we must first expand it. After it is stretched out, it will naturally shrink back down to size.

Similarly, if we wish to weaken something, we must first strengthen it. The seed of weakness invariably exists in the greatest of strengths.

In order for something to be discarded or abandoned, it is first promoted. The world is full of examples of things that are hyped up and then thrown away and forgotten without a second thought.

In order to get something, we must first give it. For instance, if we wish to be treated kindly, we must start by treating others with kindness. This works because the Tao process is circular; the principle underlying all interactions is one of dynamic, universal energy exchange.

We say that these illuminated insights are subtle, because they seem to be the very opposite of our habitual thought patterns. To understand them is to become enlightened in the subtle workings of the Tao.

That which is gentle, soft and weak seems to yield to that which possesses toughness, strength and aggressiveness, but the yielding is deceptive, for in the end the soft overcomes the hard.

It is the nature of the Tao to remain hidden. Just as the fish does not leave the depths and a country does not display its weapons and inner workings to the people, a sage remains deeply immersed in the Tao and does not utilize his or her insights against people who are more shallow.

EXPLANATION OF A PARADOX

That which has a tendency to contract must first have been extended; that which has a tendency to weaken itself must first have been strong; that which shows a tendency to destroy itself must first have been raised up; that which shows a tendency to scatter must first have been gathered.

This is the explanation of a seeming contradiction: the tender and yielding conquer the rigid and strong (i.e., spirit is stronger than matter, persuasion than force). The fish would be foolish to seek escape from its natural environment. There is no gain to a nation to compel by a show of force.

What is to be reduced,

Must first be expanded.

What is to be weakened,

Must first be made strong (ch'iang).

What is to be abolished,

Must first be established.

What is to be taken away,

Must first be given.

This is called the subtle illumination (wei ming).

The soft and weak overcome the hard and strong.

Fish must not leave the stream.

Sharp weapons (ch'i) of a state,

Must not be displayed.

Govern Peacefully

That which is to contract is first expanded; that which is to weaken is first strengthened; that which is to be felled is first reinforced. This is subtle enlightenment.

Being gentle overcomes strength. As fish should not leave the deep, so the sharp weapons of the state should always be hidden from view.

To shrink, you must first expand.

To weaken, you must first strengthen.

To knock down, you must first raise up.

To receive, you must first give.

This is the way things are.

Soft overcomes hard. Slow overcomes fast.

Fish cannot live out of the water.

A nation's best weapons should not be displayed.

Thirty-six

That which shrinks

Must first expand.

That which fails

Must first be strong.

That which is cast down

Must first be raised.

Before receiving

There must be giving.

This is called perception of the nature of things.

Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.

Fish
cannot leave deep waters,

And a country's weapons should not be displayed.

If you want a thing to contract,

You should stretch it first;

If you want a thing weakened,

You should strengthen it first;

If you want a thing gotten rid of,

You should promote it first;

If you want a thing taken away,

You should give to it first.

These are called subtle wisdom.

The supple and weak overcomes the rigid and strong.

Fish should not be allowed to leave the deep water;

The instruments of power of a state

Should not be shown to the public.

When you want to shrink it,

You must first stretch it.

When you want to make it weak,

You must first make it strong.

When you want to make it fall,

You must first make it rise.

When you want to rob it,

You must first give it.

This is called subtle light.

The soft and weak prevails over the hard and strong.

The fish may not leave the depths.

The sharp instrument of the state

May not be shown to the people.

If you want to contract something, you must first stretch it.

You must first strengthen his power before you can weaken him.

Similarly, you have to build up something first before you can demolish it.

You can only take something away from somebody after they have possessed it.

This sort of platitudes is known as "subtle discernment".

The soft and the weak can overcome the hard and the strong.

Just like the fish should not leave the deep,

The machination in politics must not be revealed to the public.

Faint Light

Wei Ming

Wishing to restrict anything,

One must first expand it;

Wishing to weaken anything,

One must first strengthen it;

Wishing to abolish anything,

One must first set it up;

Wishing to take from anything,

One must first supply it.

This is called Faint Light.

The soft conquers the hard;

The weak conquers the strong.

Fish should not break forth from the deep;

Deadly weapons of the state must not be shown off.

If a thing is capable of being contracted, no doubt is was previously expanded;

It a thing is capable of being weakened, no doubt it was previously strengthened.

Exaltation precedes abasement.

He who would take must first give.

This is the Secret Law,

Whereby the soft and the weak overcome the hard and the strong.

Leave the fish in the depths of the water, out of harm's way;

And leave the nation's sharpest weapons where they cannot be seen.

What is going to shrink has first been stretched.

What is going to weaken has first been made strong.

What is going to be ruined has first been raised up.

What is going to be taken away has first been given.

Call this the subtle truth:

The soft and weak conquer the hard and strong.

Fish should not leave the depths;

Neither should weapons of state ever be aired.

If you hope to expand, you should first contract.

If you hope to become strong, you should first weaken yourself.

If your ambition is to be exalted, humiliation will follow.

If you hold fast to something, it will surely be taken away from you.

This is the operation of the subtle law of the universe.

The law of the universe is subtle, but it can be known.

The soft and meek can overcome the hard and strong.

The strength of a country must not be displayed.

Just as fish cannot leave the deep,

one must never stray from one's true nature.

XXXVI.

Hidden
En1ightenment

What
is about to contract itself is sure to lengthen itself,

What
is about to weaken itself is sure to strengthen itself,

What
is about to ruin itself assuredly first uplifts,

And
what is about to despoil itself it first endows with gifts.

To
hidden enlightenment it is that truths like these belong,

The
tender and weak o ercome and conquer the rigid and the strong,

As
fishes perish miserably, escaping from the deep,

The
sharp tools of the State, from sight of the people keep!

If you desire to breathe deeply, you must first empty the lungs.

If you desire to be strong, you must first learn to be weak.

If you desire to be in a lofty position, you must first learn to take a lowly position.

If you desire to be enriched by gifts, you must first give away all that you have.

This is called concealment and enlightenment.

The soft overcomes the hard.

The weak overcomes the strong.

Fish cannot swim safely in shallow waters.

The secrets of government of a kingdom should not be revealed to the people.

What
is in the end

to
be shrunken,

Begins
by being first

stretched
out.

What
is in the end

to
be weakened,

Begins
by being first

made
strong.

What
is in the end

to
be thrown down,

Begins
by being first

set
on high.

What
is in the end

to
be raped,

Begins
by being first

given
riches.

Herein
is the hidden

wisdom
of life:

The
soft and

weak

overcomes
the

hard
and strong.

Just
as the fish

must
not leave

the
deeps,

The
words of agression

should
not be used.

If you wish to contract, you should first expand.

If you wish to weaken, you should first strengthen.

If you wish to destroy, you should first rouse.

If you wish to seize, you should first give.

This is called 'subtile vision': the soft overcomes the hard and the feeble overcomes the strong.

Fish should not be taken from the deep; the useful implements of the state should not be shown to men.

When one is about to take an inspiration, he is sure to make a

(previous) expiration; when he is going to weaken another, he will

first strengthen him; when he is going to overthrow another, he will

first have raised him up; when he is going to despoil another, he will

first have made gifts to him:--this is called 'Hiding the light (of

his procedure).'

The
soft overcomes the hard; and the weak the strong.

Fishes
should not be taken from the deep; instruments for the

profit of a state should not be shown to the people.

When you wish to contract something, you must first briefly expand it.

To weaken something, you must first briefly make it stronger.
To reject something,
you must first momentarily join with it.
When you wish to seize something,
you must first NOT be grasping it.
This is a 'subtle' insight!

The
soft and the weak conquer the strong.
Fish
cannot be removed alive from their watery depths;
the profit-making instruments
of State cannot be shown to the masses.

You
cannot be diminished

Unless you've been inflated

You cannot be defeated

Unless you've been elated

You
cannot be belittled

Unless you've been esteemed

Unless you're wholly missing

You cannot be redeemed

The
soft and slow can overcome

The rigid and the hard and fast

Just see your inner emptiness

For nothing else is made to last

WHAT is in the end to be shrunken,

Begins by being first stretched out.

What is in the end to be weakened,

Begins by being first made strong.

What is in the end to be thrown down,

Begins by being first set on high.

What is in the end to be despoiled,

Begins by being first richly endowed.

Herein is the subtle wisdom of life:

The soft and weak overcomes the hard and strong.

Just as the fish must not leave the deeps,

So the ruler must not display his weapons.

It is the way of the Tao that:

To reduce the influence of something,

first allow it undue influence.

To reduce something, it must first be allowed to expand.

That which will be torn down, must first be raised up.

This is the subtle way the weak can overcome the strong.

A fish should not leave the water.

And one should not display ones weapons.

If you want something to return to the source,

you must first allow it to spread out.

If you want something to weaken,

you must first allow it to become strong.

If you want something to be removed,

you must first allow it to flourish.

If you want to possess something,

you must first give it away.

This
is called the subtle understanding

of how things are meant to be.

The
soft and pliable overcomes the hard and inflexible.

Just
as fish remain hidden in deep waters,

it is best to keep weapons out of sight.

All behaviours contain their opposites:

- Hyper-inflation leads to collapse.

- A show of strength suggests insecurity.

- What goes up must come down.

- If you want to prosper, be generous.

Also:

- The feminine outlasts the masculine.

- The feminine allows, but the masculine causes.

- The feminine surrenders, then encompasses and wins.

And:

- Water wears away the rock.

- Spirit overcomes force.

- The weak will undo the mighty.

Learn to see things backwards, inside out, and upside down.

What you want shrunk

Must first be allowed to expand.

What you want weakened

Must first be strengthened.

What you want destroyed

Must first be allowed to flourish.

That which you want to take

Must first be given.

Seeing this is an understanding of the subtle.

What is soft and weak overcomes what is hard and strong.

Just as a fish should keep to deep waters,

So a country's weapons should be kept out of sight, so as not to tempt

people.

All
manifestations that expand will eventually

shrink.

All manifestations that strengthen will eventually

weaken.

All manifestations that are lifted up will

eventually be

cast down.

Nothing can be received unless it is given.

This is called distinguishing the oneness of

Infinity.

Soft
and weak forever disintegrate the hard and

strong.

Hard and strong forever disintegrate the soft and

weak.

This is called the nature of Infinity.

Fish
are at one with water;

undistinguished by Infinity.

A
nation and its weapons

cannot be distinguished.

What is to be closed, must first be opened.

What is to be weak, must first be strong.

What is to be poor, must first be rich.

What is to be taken, must first be given.

This is a subtle point.

The soft and weak overcome the hard and strong.

Fish cannot leave the deep.

The nation's wealth cannot enlighten men.

Whatever shrinks

Must first have expanded.

Whatever becomes weak

Must first have been strong.

That which is to be destroyed

Must first have flourished.

In order to receive,

One must first give.

This is called seeing the nature of things.

The soft overcomes the hard, and the weak overcomes the strong.

As fish cannot be taken from the water,

So a ruler should not reveal to the people his means of government.

To compress something, one must first prop it.

To weaken something, one must first strengthen it.

To stop something, one must first advocate it.

To take something, one must first give it.

Subtle wisdom depends on the Way

In enabling the weak to defeat the strong killers.

A fish cannot go out of deep water for its existence.

A nation's effective system should be kept unknown.

When you want to shrink something you must always enlarge it. When you want to weaken something you must always strengthen it. When you want to neglect something you must always involve yourself with it. When you want to deprive something you must always give to it.

This is called 'Subtle Clarity.' Softness and Weakness overcome what is hard and strong.

"The fish must not leave the depths the state's 'sharp weapons' must not be shown to others."

Worldly passions make man weak. Resoluteness feels man with power!

Worldly passions cripple man. Resoluteness elevates man and strengthens the consciousness.

Worldly passions enslave man. Resoluteness makes man free.

Dispassionate, gentle, and yielding conquers passionate, hard, and coarse.

The Wise Leader knows this.

Something will contract, because it was expended.

Something becomes weak, because it was strong.

Something goes high, because it was low.

Somebody receives, because he gave before.

This is real wisdom, when the subtle is thus applied.

As
a fish shouldn't leave the water,

So the Wise Leader doesn't glorify force.

Simplicity brings peace as trust brings harmony.

If
one would contract something, then one must first resolutely spread it out.
If one would weaken something, then one must first resolutely strengthen it.
If one would have a thing be discarded one must first resolutely cause it to
flourish. If one would seize something one must first resolutely give it away.
This [approach] is called subtle discernment. The pliant and weak overcome the
rigid and strong. [So] fish cannot leave the depths and the sharp instruments
of the state cannot be shown [to threaten] the people.

About to shut it, let it first be opened.

About to weaken it, let it first be strengthened.

About to destroy it, let it first be advanced.

About to snatch it, let it first be given away.

This is called the subtle wisdom.

The soft overcomes the hard;

The weak overcomes the strong.

As fish cannot be separated from deep water,

The state's sharp weapons cannot be shown to the people.

Concealing the Advantage

In order to deplete it,

It must be thoroughly extended.

In order to weaken it,

It must be thoroughly strengthened.

In order to reject it,

It must be thoroughly promoted.

In order to take away from it,

It must be thoroughly endowed.

This is called a Subtle Insight.

The yielding can triumph over teh inflexible;

The weak can triumph over the strong.

Fish should not be taken from deep waters;

Nor should organizations make obvious their advantages.

A river can penetrate the toughest rock. A glacier can create the tallest mountain. It is not the work that we admire, but the result.

What is to be shrunken

Is first stretched out;

What is to be weakened

Is first made strong;

What will be thrown over

Is first raised up;

What will be withdrawn

Is first bestowed.

This
indeed is

Subtle Light;

The gentle way

Will overcome

The hard and strong.

As fish should not

Get out of pools,

The realm's edged tools

Should not be shown

To anybody.

In order to contract it, it is necessary to expand it for the time being.

In order to weaken it, it is necessary to strengthen it for the time being.

In order to destroy it, it is necessary to promote it for the time being.

In order to grasp it, it is necessary to give to it for the time being.

This is called profound insight (and also the reason why) the soft and the weak overcome the hard and the strong.

(Just like) fish cannot be taken away from deep water,

Effective weapons of the state cannot be easily displayed to others.

If you would like to gather him in, you must resolve yourself to let him aggrandize himself.

If you would like to weaken him, you must resolve yourself to let him grow strong.

If you would like to nullify him, you must resolve yourself to let him flourish.

If you would like to take him, you must resolve yourself to let him have his way.

Such an approach is called subtle and perspicacious.

Softness and pliancy conquer hardness and forcefulness.

Fish must not be allowed to escape to the depths.

The sharp instruments of the state may not be disclosed to the people.

1. If you wish to shrink it,

2. You must certainly stretch it.

3. If you wish to weaken it,

4. You must certainly strengthen it.

5. If you wish to desert it,

6. You must certainly work closely with it.

7. If you wish to snatch something from it,

8. You must certainly give something to it.

9. This is called the Subtle Light.

10. The submissive and weak conquer the strong.

11.
Fish should not be taken out of the depths;

12. The state's sharp weapons should not be shown to the people.

To make something
small,

you need to appreciate its size.

To make something weak,

you must recognize its strength.

To get rid of something,

you need to hold it tight.

To take something,

you must give it up entirely.

This is a subtle
truth.

Sensitivity and weakness overcome unfeeling strength.

.

The Mystic Light

In order to contract, it is necessary first to expand.

In order to weaken, it is necessary first to strengthen.

In order to reduce, it is necessary first to build up.

In order to receive, it is necessary first to give.

This is called the mystic Light.

The soft and gentle overcome the hard and strong.

As fish stay in the deep water,

so sharp weapons of the state should not be displayed.

What is to shrink must first inflate itself.

What is to become weak must first become strong.

What is to fall must first arise.

If you would receive practice giving.

That is what I call the law of reversion: by yielding, the soft conquers the hard the weak, the strong spirit, force.

The Doctrine of Reversion

Lao Tze says,

A man who wants his opponent to become a greedy man should allow him the chance to expand his benefit first.

He who wants to weaken his competitor should let his ambitions grow first.

He who wants to demolish his adversary should let him achieve first.

He who wants to plunder his enemy should let him have the storage place first.

These are subtle but effective stratagems.

The feeble will overcome the strong.

But fishes shouldn't leave the deep; a state's strategy shouldn't be shown to any person who is not concerned with it.

OVERCOMING

It
is the way of the Tao,

that things which expand might also shrink;

that he who is strong, will at some time be weak,

that he who is raised will then be cast down,

and that all men have a need to give,

and also have a need to receive.

The
biggest fish stay deep in the pond,

and a country's best weapons

should be kept locked away.

That which is soft and supple,

may overcome the hard and strong.

If you want to shrink something,

you must first allow it to expand.

If you want to get rid of something,

you must first allow it to flourish.

If you want to take something,

you must first allow it to be given.

This is called the subtle perception

of the way things are.

The soft overcomes the hard.

The slow overcomes the fast.

Let your workings remain a mystery.

Just show people the results.

What is to be contracted may need to be expanded;

what is to be weakened may need to be strengthened;

what is to be reduced may need to be increased;

and what is to be reformed may need to be impaired.

This is called "Starting enlightenment".

A fish cannot live out of water.

A country with deadly weapons should never demonstrate them before others.

When you want to constrict something,

You must first let it expand;

When you want to weaken something,

You must first enable it;

When you want to eliminate something,

You must first allow it;

When you want to conquer something,

You must first let it be.

This is called the Fine Light.

The weak overcomes the strong.

Fish cannot live away from the source.

The sharp weapon of the nation should never be displayed.

XXXVI

What
you want to shrink; let expand

What you want to weaken; let grow strong

What you want to avoid; let approach

What you want to own; give away

Honestly
done, this is subtle and effective

It is how the weak overcomes the strong, how the few lead the many

In the end, a leader leads because people consent to it

And force will never be as effective as engaging simple cooperation

Should You Want to Contain

Should you want to contain something,

you must deliberately let it expand.

Should you want to weaken something,

you must deliberately let it grow strong.

Should you want to eliminate something,

you must deliberately allow it to flourish.

Should you want to take something away,

you must deliberately grant it.

This is called subtle illumination.

Flexibility and yielding

overcome adamant coerciveness.

Fish shouldn't be taken from the depths;

the effective tools of the nation

shouldn't be shown to others.

In order to reduce it, first expand it.

In order to weaken it, first strengthen it.

In order to abolish it, first establish it.

In order to take it, first give it.

This is called subtle wisdom.

Flexibility and compromise win out over stiffness and aggressiveness.

Fish cannot leave water.

Never show the country's best weapons to the enemy.

In order to shrink it, it must first be stretched out.

In order to weaken it, it must first be made strong.

In order to throw down it, it must first be set on high.

In order to obtain it, it must first be given.

That is subtle and wise.

The soft overcomes the hard.

The weak overcomes the strong.

The fish cannot leave the deep.

The useful instruments of the nation must not be displayed to the people.

To shrink it, expand first.

To weaken it, strengthen first.

To throw it away, get first.

To rob him, give first,

This is called deception. Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.

Fish cannot leave water.

Do not show a country's strength.

That which is to be shrunk

must first be stretched out.

That which is to be weakened

must first be strengthened.

That which is to be cast down

must first be raised up.

That which is to be taken

must first be given.

There
is wisdom in dimming your light.

For the soft and gentle

will overcome the hard and powerful.

Fish
are best left in deep waters.

And, weapons are best kept out of sight.

Shrink
to extend

exercise in order to weaken

stabilize for revolt

give in order to receive

die to live.

This is the balance of nature

soft
overcomes hard,

weak overcomes strong.

Like
a fish below the surface,

power should remain hidden.

What's in the end to be shrunk can first be stretched. The one who is to be
made to dwindle (in power) can first be caused to expand; and then it's necessary
first to expand.

Whatever is to be weakened must begin by being made strong [enough for it first
of all].

He who is to be laid low can first be exalted to power. So: first promote, next
destroy. Or: To destroy, first promote.

What's to be overthrown must begin by being set up. He who would be a taker
must begin as a giver.

And this is the fine art. of dimming" one's light.

According to this [set-up] the soft overcomes the hard; and the weak, the strong.
[Such things can happens, but most often not, or what?]

Fish should be left in the deep pool, not taken away from water. And sharp weapons
of the state should not be displayed, but left where nobody can see them.

When you wish to contract something,

you must momentarily expand it;

When you wish to weaken something,

you must momentarily strengthen it;

When you wish to reject something,

you must momentarily join with it;

When you wish to seize something,

you must momentarily give it up.

This is called "subtle insight."

The soft and weak conquer the strong.

Fish cannot be removed from the watery depths;

The profitable instruments of state cannot be shown to the people.

When Nature is about to withhold a thing it is sure first to increase it.

When about to weaken it is first sure to strengthen.

When about to debase it is certain first to exalt.

When about to deprive it is first sure to give.

This is what I call the covert agreement.

The soft and the weak overcome the hard and the strong.

As a fish out of water is in danger, so a nation is in peril when its armaments are revealed to the people.

Room to Breathe

If there are issues between you,

they must have room to breathe.

If you repress or ignore them,

they will smolder on.

If they are exposed to the air

they may flare up for a moment

but will die for lack of fuel.

Don't be afraid of discussing problems,

or expressing fears.

Just do it tenderly and without judgment.

This gives each of you the chance

to accept, to nurture, and to trust.

In order to contract, It is necessary first to expand. In order to
weaken, It is necessary first to strengthen. In order to destroy, It is
necessary first to promote. In order to grasp, It is necessary first to
give.

This is called subtle light. The weak and the tender overcome the hard and the strong.

Fish should not be taken away from water. And sharp weapons of state should not be displayed to the people.

He who feels
punctured

Must once have been a bubble,

He who feels unarmed

Must have carried arms,

He who feels belittled

Must have been consequential,

He who feel5 deprived

Must have had privilege,

Whereas a man with insight

Knows that to keep under is to endure.

What happens to a fish pulled out of a pond?

Or to an implement of state pulled out of a scabbard?

Unseen, they survive.

If it wants to shrink something, it always first expands it.

If it wants to weaken something, it always first strengthens it.

If it wants to get rid of something, it always first promotes it.

If it wants to take something, it always first gives it away.

These are delicate wisdoms, which is that the weak overcome the strong.

Big fish cannot leave deep water;

National security secrets cannot be shown to outsiders.

What is ultimately to be compressed must first be expanded.

What is ultimately to be weakened must first be strengthened.

What is ultimately to be discarded must first be promoted.

What is ultimately to be taken away must first be given.

This is the subtle light of wisdom.

The soft overcomes the hard.

The weak overcomes the strong.

The fish should never leave the water.

The formed should never leave the formless.

To compress something, one must first prop it.

To weaken something, one must first strengthen it.

To stop something, one must first advocate it.

To take something, one must first give it.

Subtle wisdom depends on the Way

In enabling the weak to defeat the strong killers.

A fish cannot go out of deep water for its existence.

A nation's effective system should be kept unknown.

It is the way of the Tao that:

To reduce the influence of something,

first allow it undue influence.

To reduce something, it must first be allowed to expand.

That which will be torn down, must first be raised up.

This is the subtle way the weak can overcome the strong.

A fish should not leave the water.

And one should not display ones weapons.

