===== Chapter 51 =====

The Tao gives birth to them

Virtue rears them

Nature forms them

Conditions complete them.

Therefore, of the ten-thousand things

There are none that do not honor the Tao

And value Virtue.

The honoring of the Tao

The valuing of Virtue:

Man does not command them [to do so]

And they are always genuinely themselves

Because the Tao gives birth to them

And Virtue raises them

Leads them, nourishes them

Erects them, poisons them

Supports them, destroys them.

Giving birth but not possessing

Acting but not presuming

Leading but not oppressively ruling—

This is called "Mystic Virtue."

Tao bears them Te nurses them Events form them Energy completes them.
Therefore the ten thousand beings Honour Tao and respect Te. Tao is
honoured Te is respected Because they do not give orders But endure in
their own nature. Therefore, Tao bears them and Te nurses them, Rears
them, Raises them, Shelters them, Nurtures them, Supports them, Protects
them.

Bears them without owning them, Helps them without coddling them, Rears them without ruling them. This is called original Te.

Tao gives life to all things.

Virtue nourishes them.

Material world gives them form.

Circumstances make them complete.

Therefore of the myriad things,

Each one reveres Tao

And each one pays tribute to virtue.

They do so without being ordered.

They do so of themselves.

Tao gives life to them.

Virtue nourishes and matures them.

It teaches them and protects them.

It rests them, supports them and guards them.

Tao gives life to them but it does not possess them.

It toils for them but expects no praise.

It guides them but does not dominate them.

This is the secret virtue.

TE AND All THINGS

As Tao gives birth to All Things, Te provides the nourishment to rear them - To shape them and form them - Permitting each to realize the capacity within. As Tao is revered and worshipped, Te is exalted and honored by All Things. Such, being neither requested nor demanded, Is the nature of things, Happening spontaneously, of its own accord.

Arising from the Tao,

By Te, are All Things nourished,

developed, cared for, sheltered, comforted, grown and protected.

In rearing All Things,

It seeks neither to lay claim nor possess them.

Acting as a help and guide,

It seeks neither credit nor reward.

Leading them,

It seeks neither to master nor control.

It is called profound and mysterious.

The Tao gives life to them.

The action of the soul nourishes them.

The material world shapes them.

Circumstances perfect them.

The ten-thousand things (everything) all honor the Tao and favor the action of the soul.

They revere the Tao.

The action of the soul is their treasure.

Above all, it is without destiny, yet always is as it is.

Hence, the Tao gives life to them.

The action of the soul

- gives birth to them

- sustains them

- nurtures them

- protects them

- prepares them

- feeds them

- shelters them

- gives them life and does not possess them

- acts and does not presume

- develops and does not rule

This is called the mystery of the action of the soul.

THE TEH AS THE NURSE

All things proceed from the Tao, and are sustained by its forth-flowing

virtue. Every one taketh form according to his nature, and is perfect,

each in his particular Way. Therefore, each and every one of them

glorify the Tao, and worship its forth-flowing Virtue.

This
glorifying of the Tao, this worship of the Teh, is constantly

spontaneous, and not by appointment of Law.

Thus
the Tao buddeth them out, nurtureth them, developeth them,

sustaineth them, perfecteth them, ripeneth them, upholdeth them, and

reabsorbeth them.

It
buddeth them forth, and claimeth not lordship over them; it is

overseer of their changes, and boasteth not of his puissance; perfecteth

them, and interfereth not with their Ways; this is called the Mystery of

its Virtue.

All things are produced by the Tao, and nourished by its outflowingoperation. They receive their forms according to the nature of each, andare completed according to the circumstances of their condition. Thereforeall things without exception honour the Tao, and exalt its outflowing operation.This honouring of the Tao and exalting of its operation is not the resultof any ordination, but always a spontaneous tribute. Thus it is that theTao produces (all things), nourishes them, brings them to their full growth,nurses them, completes them, matures them, maintains them and overspreadsthem. It produces them and makes no claim to the possession of them; itcarries them though their processes and does not vaunt its ability in doingso; it brings them to maturity and exercises no control over them;-thisis called mysterious operation.

The Unspeakable makes all things appear

The active force determines their nature

Their nature determines their shape

The circumstance determines their final appearance

Therefore all creatures,

With the exception of erring mankind, honour the Unspeakable

And live according to their natures

This is all a natural process

And nobody rewards them for it

The Unspeakable makes them live, feeds them, makes them grow

Fulfils them, gives them peace, supports and guards them

It makes them live, but never forces them

It takes them along the stream of life, but does not possess

It makes mature, but does not control

That is an unfathomable mystery

Nature produces things, and intelligence guides them. Although different in kind, each thing has its own self-sufficient intelligence to guide it. Nothing can fail to emulate Nature and intelligence by embodying them within its own life. Such emulation is not demanded, but occurs of its own accord.

Nature originates and suckles, rears and develops, protects and provides for, and guides and perfects all things.

Whatever is produced, Nature accepts it for what it is. However it behaves, Nature lets it follow its own way. Whatever its fortune, Nature injects no external interference. Such is Nature's marvelous sagacity.

Tao gave them birth;

The "power" of Tao reared them,

Shaped them according to their kinds,

Perfected them, giving to each its strength.

Therefore

Of the ten thousand things there is not one that does not worship Tao

And do homage to its "power".

No mandate ever went forth that accorded to Tao the right to be worshipped,

Nor to its "power" the right to be worshipped,

Nor to its "power" the right to receive homage.

It was always and of itself so.

Therefore as Tao bore them and the "power" of Tao reared them,

Made them grow, fostered them,

Harboured them,

Brewed for them,

So you must rear them, but not lay claim to them,

Control them, but never lean upon them,

Be chief among them, but not manage them.

This is called the mysterious power."

Tao gives them life.

Virtue gives them nourishment.

The manifest world gives them form.

The tendencies of each make them what they are.

Therefore the ten thousand things honor Tao and esteem Virtue.

This honor and esteem are not commanded.

It is just the nature of things.

And so, all things arise from Tao.

By Virtue they are nourished, developed, clothed,

sheltered, soothed, aged and buried.

To create without possessing,

to act without making claims,

to lead without taking command—

this is timeless Virtue.

The way gives things life

Character raises them

Existence shapes them

Conditions complete them

So it is that the myriad beings, without exception,

Ennoble the way and honor character

The way will be ennobled

Character will be honored

But nobody has to command this

as it always proceeds out of nature

In this way the way gives things life

Character raises them

Sustains them, brings them up

Shelters them, heals them

Nurtures them, protects them

Creates but does not possess

Acts but does not expect

Leads but does not rule

These may be called "mystic powers"

Love

Tao gives birth to them and Virtue nourishes them.

Substance gives them form

And their unique capacities complete them.

Therefore the ten thousand things

As for their veneration of Tao and their honouring of Virtue -

No one rewards them for it; it is constantly so on its own.

Tao gives birth to them,

nourishes them and matures them,

Completes them, rests them,

Rears them, supports them,

And protect them.

It gives birth to them

But does not try to own them;

It acts on their behalf

But does not make them dependent;

It matures them

But does not rule them.

This is what we call Profound Virtue.

Tao gives life to all beings. Nature nourishes them. Fellow creatures shape them. Circumstances complete them. Everything in existence respects Tao and honours nature - not by decree, but spontaneously. Tao gives life to all beings. Nature watches over them, develops them, shelters them, nurses them, grows them, ripens them, completes them, buries them, and returns them.

Giving birth, nourishing life, shaping things without possessing them, serving without expectation of reward, leading without dominating: These are the profound virtues of nature, and of nature's best beings.

Life: the gift of Tao.

Growth: the gift of Te.

Form and matter merge;

Beings are brought to maturity,

Each in its unique nature.

Everything within Nature

Lives for Tao and loves Te.

It is a love of attraction,

And not of constraint.

Love forever free of expectation

Is the love that has always been.

For life is the gift of Tao,

And growth, the gift of Te.

As One, they nourish and nurture;

They bring maturity and completion;

They protect, provide, and teach

The numberless forms of Being,

And then bring them back to the Source.

To give life without claiming possession;

To help without demanding tribute;

To teach without power or pedantry:

This is called the deepest Te.

I was guided in this verse to let the words Tao and Te speak for themselves without translation, if only to allow the music of this wonderful lyric play as freely as possible in this setting. As one would expect, it reads far more beautifully in the original Chinese, with its plainsong style rhythm and alliteration, particularly in the iteration of the character chih throughout the poem (it appears fifteen times, and is a possessive or nominative pronoun, which could mean "he/she/they" or "his/hers/their" or "him/her/them"). Even in English, this poem is an excellent illustration of how Lao Tzu's musical voice complements his teaching voice.

Tao causes all things to exist; Teh sustains them.

Reality gives them form; fate completes them.

Thus all things honor Tao and respect Teh

of their own accord.

Teh
sustains all things in existence.

It fosters growth, develops them,

harbors them, provides shelter.

It nourishes them, gives protection.

Everything
exists through Tao

and nothing is rejected.

Everything is produced through Tao

but Tao is not possessive.

Tao is superior but never interferes.

Whet the Tao produces and its energy nourishes, nature forms and natural forces establish. On this account there is nothing that does not honour the Tao and reverence its energy. This honour and reverence are spontaneous, not the result of a mandate.

So the Tao produces. Its energy nourishes, increases, feeds, establishes, matures, controls, broods over. It produces, but keeps nothing for itself; acts, but does not depend on its actions; increases, but does not insist on having its own way. This indeed is the mystery of energy.

Tao produces them (all things);

Virtue feeds them;

All of them appear in different forms;

Each is perfect by being given power.

Therefore none of the numerous things does not honour Tao and esteem virtue.

The honouring of Tao and the esteem of virtue are done, not by command, but always of their own accord. Therefore Tao produces them, makes them grow, nourishes them, shelters them, brings them up and protects them.

When all things come into being, Tao does not reject them.

It produces them without holding possession of them.

It acts without depending upon them, and raises them without lording it over them.

When merits are accomplished, it does not lay claim to them.

Because it does not lay claim to them, therefore it does not lose them.

Natural Guides and Natural Virtuosity

A guide starts it,

virtuosity cultivates it,

Natural kinds model it

and circumstances complete it.

For this reason, among the ten-thousand natural kinds,

None fail to respect a guide and value virtuosity.

This respecting of guides

and valuing of virtuosity

is not, in general, commanded in words instead it treats self-so-ing as constant.

Hence a guide starts it,

virtuosity cultivates it,

Acts as its elder, educates it,

shades it, poisons it,

nourishes it and returns it.

Gives rise to and not 'exist,'

Deem:act and not rely on anything.

Acts as elder and does not rule.

This would be called 'profound virtuosity.'

Tao creates all things;

Tê cultivates them.

Things are shaped according to their natures;

Relational conditions fulfill them.

Therefore, ten thousand things all venerate the source of Tao

And value the potentialities of Tê.

Tao is venerated and Tê is valued spontaneously;

No one orders that it be so.

Thus, Tao creates all things;

Tê cultivates them.

They give them birth.

They nourish them.

They give them shape.

They give them quality.

They shelter them.

They guard them.

They create them but do not possess them.

They work for them but expect no reward.

They bring them to maturity but do not control them.

This is called invisible attainment.

The Tao creates.

The virtue nourishes.

The things form.

The environment shapes them to completion.

That is why the myriad creatures all respect the Tao, and value virtue.

When the Tao is respected, virtue is valued.

No one can command them but the Tao.

That is why the Tao creates myriad creatures.

Virtue nourishes them, cultivates them, educates them, completes them, ripens them, supports them, carries them.

The Tao creates them without possessing them, benefits them without profiting from them, guides them without commanding them.

That is what profound virtue means.

The Tao generates them,

Virtue nurtures them,

Matter forms them,

And instruments complete them.

Hence, the ten thousand things

Honor the Tao and treasure virtue.

That the Tao is honored

And virtue is treasured is not because

Anyone has conferred titles upon them;

It is constantly the way things are.

The Tao generates them,

Nurtures them,

Grows them,

Raises them,

Shapes them,

Solidifies them,

Stores them,

Covers them.

It generates without possessing,

Assists without taking credit,

Leads without dominating.

This is called deep and remote virtue.

The Tao created all things,

The way of the Tao nourished them,

All things emerge in different forms,

Each of them is perfect in the nature of the Tao within it.

Therefore, there is not one among the myriad of things

That does not honor the Tao and cherish its way.

Honoring the Tao and cherishing its way are not dictated by law,

But rather come from within.

Therefore the Tao creates them, makes them grow, nourishes them,

Guards them, lifts them, and protects them.

When all things are created, the Tao does not reject them.

It creates them without owning them.

It operates without depending on them, and raises them without controlling them.

When its work is completed, it does not lay any claim to them.

Since it does not lay claim to them, it does not lose them.

The way gives them life;

Virtue rears them;

Things give them shape;

Circumstances bring them to maturity.

Therefore
the myriad creatures all revere the way and honor virtue.

Yet the way is revered and virtue honored not because this is decreed by any
authority but because it is natural for them to be treated so.

Thus
the way gives them life and rears them;

Brings them up and nurses them;

Brings them to fruition and maturity;

Feeds and shelters them.

It
gives them life yet claims no possession;

It benefits them yet exacts no gratitude;

It is the steward yet exercises no authority.

Such is called the mysterious virtue.

Nursing Virtue

Reason quickens all creatures. Virtue feeds them. Reality shapes them. The forces complete them. Therefore among the ten thousand things there is none that does not esteem Reason and honor virtue.

Since the esteem of Reason and the honoring of virtue is by no one commanded, it is forever spontaneous.

Therefore it is said that Reason quickens all creatures, while virtue feeds them, raises them, nurtures them, completes them, matures them, rears them, and protects them.

To quicken but not to own, to make but not to claim, to raise but not to rule, this is called profound virtue.

For every being, the Tao is. Conscious existence comes naturally. Physical appearance is determined by circumstances. Therefore, the Tao is honoured by all without effort. All are born of it, and it provides their livelihood. It is the safe haven of life and the destination of death. It produces everything, but possesses nothing. Through it all opportunities arise, but it isn't involved. Its virtue is total, and its function is mysterious.

Cultivated by Direction, reared by virtue;

formed by matter, completed by interaction.

Thus, myriad matters revere Direction and value virtue.

The reason Direction is revered and virtue valued is that they do not command but let myriad matters visit Nature.

Thus,

Direction cultivates,

virtue rears, nurtures, guides, comforts, protects, cares, shelters.

Cultivating without possessing,

providing without claiming,

nurturing without dominating,

This is the Profoundest Virtue.

Way gives birth to them and Integrity nurtures them.

Matter shapes them and conditions complete them.

That's why the ten thousand things always honor Way and treasure Integrity.

Honoring Way and treasuring Integrity

isn't obedience to command,

it's occurrence perennially appearing of itself.

Way gives birth to them and Integrity nurtures them:

it fosters and sustains them, harbors and succors them, nourishes and shelters them.

Giving birth without possessing,

animating without subjecting,

fostering without dominating:

this is called dark-enigma Integrity.

Tao creates all things,

Virtue nurtures them.

Matter gives them forms, and

Environment allows them to succeed.

Thus all things honour Tao and value Virtue.

Tao being honoured and Virtue being valued,

They always occurred naturally without being dictated by anyone.

Thus:

Tao creates all thing.

Virtue nurtures them:

They grow and develop;

Bear fruits and mature; and

Are cared for and protected.

To create, but not to possess;

To care for, but not to control;

To lead, but not to subjugate.

This is called the profound virtue.

Tao
is giving birth

Ideal is raising

Things are embodying

The environment is perfecting.

Appropriately
it happens that of the 10000 things

None lack venerating tao yet treasuring ideal.

The
venerability of tao, the treasurability of the ideal

In the end it is the command of noone yet it is entirely
natural.

So
tao is giving birth

Ideal is raising

Growing, rearing, balancing, maturing, deepening, enveloping.

Giving
birth yet without possessing

Acting yet without relying

Growing yet without directing

Appropriately called insightful ideal.

The Principle gives life to beings, then its Virtue nourishes them, until the completion of their nature, until the perfection of their faculties. Therefore all beings venerate the Principle and its Virtue.

No one has the eminence of the Principle and its Virtue conferred on them; they have it always, naturally. The Principle gives life; its Virtue gives growth, protects, perfects, matures, maintains, And covers (all beings).

When they are born, it does not monopolize them; it lets them act freely, without exploiting them; it lets them grow, without tyrannizing them. This is the action of transcendent Virtue.

Tao produces them

Virtue raises them

Things shape them

Forces perfect them

Therefore all things respect the Tao and value virtue

The respect for Tao, the value of virtue

Not due to command but to constant nature

Thus Tao produces them

Virtue raises them

Grows them, educates them

Perfects them, matures them

Nurtures them, protects them

Produces but does not possess

Acts but does not flaunt

Nurtures but does not dominate

This is called mystic virtue

The Tao is the source of creation. The Tao gives birth to all living things.

Virtue raises all living things. In other words, all living things grow and develop by virtue of the life force within them. Their virtue is their inherent power of life, which is an essential part of the Tao.

The tangible aspects of the environment shape all living things. The physical environment

Therefore, there are none of the myriad things who do not venerate the Tao

or esteem itsvirtue.

This veneration of the Tao and esteeming of its virtue is something they do naturally, withoutbeing forced.

Therefore, Tao gives birth.

Its virtue rears, develops, raises, adjusts and disciplines,

Nourishes, covers and protects,

Produces but does not possess,

Acts without expectation,

Leads without forcing.

This is called "Mysterious Virtue."

When the Tao produces and its energy nourishes,

nature forms and natural forces establish. On this account there is nothing that does not honor the Tao and reverence its energy. This honor and reverence are spontaneous, not the result of a mandate.

So the Tao produces. Its energy nourishes, increases, feeds, establishes, matures, controls, broods over.

It produces, but keeps nothing for itself; acts, but does not depend on its action; increases, but does not insist on having its own way. This indeed is the mystery of energy.

TEH AS A NURSE

Tao gives life to all creatures; teh feeds them; materiality shapes them; energy completes them. p. 37 Therefore among all things there is none that does not honor Tao and esteem teh. Honor for Tao and esteem for teh is never compelled, it is always spontaneous. Therefore Tao gives life to them, but teh nurses them, raises them, nurtures, completes, matures, rears, protects them.

Tao gives life to them but makes no claim of ownership; teh forms them but makes no claim upon them, raises them but does not rule them. This is profound vitality (teh).

Tao gives birth,

Te rears (hsü),

Things (wu) shape,

Circumstances (shih) complete.

Therefore the ten thousand things,

None do not respect Tao and treasure te.

Tao is respected,

Te is treasured,

Not by decree (ming),

But by spontaneity (tzu-jan).

Therefore Tao gives birth,

Te keeps, grows, nurtures, matures, ripens, covers and buries.

To give birth without possession,

To act (wei) without holding on to,

To grow (chang) without lording over,

This is called the dark te.

Tao causes all things to exist; Teh sustains them. Reality gives them form; fate finishes them. Thus all things honor Tao and respect Teh of their own accord.

So, Tao causes all things to exist and Teh sustains them. It fosters growth, develops them, harbors them, provides shelter. It nourishes them, gives protection.

Everything exists through Tao and nothing is rejected; everything is produced through Tao but Tao is not possessive; Tao is superior but never interferes.

Tao gives birth to the ten thousand things. Te nurtures them.

They are formed from matter and completed by environment.

Therefore, the ten thousand things honor Tao and respect Te,

not in response to commandments, but just naturally.

Tao gives birth to the ten thousand things,

and Te nurtures, rears, develops, shelters, and protects them.

But Tao and Te do not try to own or rule the ten thousand things,

nor do they seek to make them dependent.

This is true power.

Fifty-one

All things arise from Tao.

They are nourished by Virtue.

They are formed from matter.

They are shaped by environment.

Thus the ten thousand things all respect Tao and honor Virtue.

Respect of Tao and honor of Virtue are not demanded,

But they are in the nature of things.

Therefore all things arise from Tao.

By Virtue they are nourished,

Developed, cared for,

Sheltered, comforted,

Grown, and protected.

Creating without claiming,

Doing without taking credit,

Guiding without interfering,

This is Primal Virtue.

The Tao begets all creatures;

The virtue rears them;

Substance gives them shape;

Forces in opposition accomplish them.

Therefore all creatures worship the Tao and honor virtue.

This worship and honor stems from the fact

That the Tao and virtue never unnaturally

Impose their influence on all creatures.

In this way

The Tao begets all creatures;

The virtue rears them,

Promotes them, natures them,

Brings them to fruition and maturity,

Meanwhile maintains and defends them.

Giving them life without claiming to be their owner;

Availing them without claiming to be their benefactor;

And being their head without ruling them;

All these are called the most intrinsic Teh (virtue).

Tao gives life [to the ten thousand things];

Te nurtures them.

Materiality shapes them;

The circumstances fulfill them.

Therefore, of the ten thousand things

None fails to revere Tao and honor Te.

The revering of Tao,

The honoring of Te -

No one orders it.

It is always so of itself [tzu-jan].

Therefore Tao gives them life;

Te nurtures them.

Makes them flourish and grow;

Gives them security and comfort;

Feeds and shelters them.

To give them life, without possessing them;

To rule them, without depending on them;

To lead them, without presiding over them -

This is called the mysterious Te.

Dao produces everything.

De nourishes everything.

Dao and De work in tandem and things begin to take shape.

Things begin to evolve according to the circumstances.

Hence, all beings respect and venerate Dao and De.

Dao and De are so venerated because they do not exert control.

Everything is allowed to develop naturally.

Therefore, Dao procreates everything; De nurtures.

De facilitates growth, development, fruition and ripening.

It also nourishes and protects.

Dao procreates but does not possess.

De accomplishes but does not claim credit.

It facilitates growth but does not exert control.

This is known as "inconspicuous virtue".

Nourishing Virtue

Yang Teh

Tao produces all things;

Teh (virtue) rears them;

Material elements shape them;

Environmental forces perfect them.

That's why of the ten thousand things,

None does not honor Tao and exalt Teh.

Tao is honored and Teh is exalted,

Not in obedience to anyone's command,

But always in accord with Innate Freedom.

Thus while Tao produces things, Teh rears them,

Brings them up, develops them, perfects them,

Matures them, feeds them, and shelters them.

To produce but not to claim ownership,

To act but not to presume on the result,

To lead but not to manipulate -

This is called Mystic Virtue.

The Tao gave birth to them;

Virtue nourished them,

Gave to each its form,

Brought each to perfection,

And gave to each its power.

Therefore among all created things there is not one which does not honour the Tao and reverence Virtue.

And if the Tao is thus honoured and Virtue thus reverenced,

It is not because an edict went forth.

It has always been so.

Thus: The Tao gave birth to them, nourished them,

Made them grow, protected them, perfected them.

To rear them and not possess them,

To quicken them and lay no claim to them,

To govern them and not be dependent on them -

Such is the Mysterious Power.

Tao gives them life;

Virtue shapes them;

Reality rears them;

Circumstance completes them.

Thus the ten thousand things

All worship Tao and esteem virtue.

No one commands them

To worship Tao and esteem virtue.

They do so of themselves.

For Tao gives them life.

Virtue nurses them, raises them,

Nurtures them, shelters them,

Comforts them, feeds them,

And protects them.

Rear but don't own!

Work but don't claim!

Raise but don't butcher!

This is called inward virtue.

The natural essence of the universe gives life to all things.

Virtue nurses them.

Matter shapes them.

The natural environment brings them to maturity.

Therefore, all things without exception revere the subtle essence and honor virtue.

Though the subtle essence deserves reverence,

it does not demand it.

And though virtue ought to be honored,

it, too, does not demand it.

Thus, it is the subtle essence that gives life to all things, and with its virtue nurses them, grows them, fosters them, shelters them, comforts them, nourishes them and embraces them.

It does all this, yet it claims no possession,

expects no gratitude, and desires no lordship.

This is called the subtle virtue of the universe.

LI.

The
Nourishing Teh

All
living things are from the Tao,

And
nourished by the Teh s advance,

Take
shape as things in each combine,

And
grow by force and circumstance;

Hence
all things honor Tao that grow,

And
all exalt its vast outflow.

This
exaltation of the Tao,

This
honor where it operates,

Is not obedience to command

From
that which fashions or creates,

But comes
from all, whate er they be,

A
tribute cast spontaneously.

The
Tao produces everything,

The
Teh, it nurses, raises, feeds,

Completes,
matures, prolongs, and spreads

O er
all protection for their needs;

Hence
all things honor Tao that grow,

And
all exalt its vast outflow.

Producing
life for all, it holds

No
ownership; it makes all things,

But
needs them not; it carries through

Their
birth and growth; to life it brings

Long
lasting, yet takes no control,

This
mystic virtue of the whole.

Tao gives Life to all beings.

Teh nourishes them.

It gives to each being its form.

It gives the inward urge towards perfectness.

That is why there is no living creature that does not reverence Tao and honour Teh.

The veneration of Tao!

The honour of Teh!

No Master has decreed it,

But eternally it affirms the Self.

Therefore Tao gives Life to all beings,

It nourishes and makes them grow,

It rears them and perfects them,

It sustains, feeds, and protects them.

It gives them Life, but does not possess them.

It gives them activity, but does not depend o them.

It urges them to grow, but does not rule them.

This is called profound Teh.

TAO ( THE LAWS OF THE UNIVERSE )

gives them life,

Virtue (Power)

nurses them,

Matter

shapes them,

Environment

completes them.

All things worship Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

and pray to Virtue (Power).

They have not been commanded to worship Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

and pray to Virtue (Power),

But they always do so automatically.

It is Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

that gives them life:

Its Virtue (Power)

that nurses them,

grows them,

raises them,

shelters them,

comforts them,

feeds them

and covers them under her wings.

To give life but to demand nothing,

To do your work

but to set no importance to it,

To be a leader,

not a rule maker,

This is called

Hidden Virtue (Power).

The Way produces them, Virtue rears them, things lend their form, environment completes their development.

Therefore the ten thousand things there is none but honours the Way and values Virtue.

Honouring the Way and valuing Virtue is not at somebody's behest but is always spontaneous.

For the Way produces, Virtue rears. They grow, feed, prosper, lead, support and shelter.

They produce and rear: they produce but do not appropriate, they act but do not rely (on the result), they grow but do not control.

When a work has been accomplished they do not rest in it. Indeed, just because they do not rest in it, they do not withdraw.

This is called the mystic Virtue.

All things are produced by the Tao, and nourished by its

outflowing operation. They receive their forms according to the

nature of each, and are completed according to the circumstances of

their condition. Therefore all things without exception honour the

Tao, and exalt its outflowing operation.

This
honouring of the Tao and exalting of its operation is not the

result of any ordination, but always a spontaneous tribute.

Thus
it is that the Tao produces (all things), nourishes them,

brings them to their full growth, nurses them, completes them, matures

them, maintains them, and overspreads them.

It
produces them and makes no claim to the possession of them; it

carries them through their processes and does not vaunt its ability in

doing so; it brings them to maturity and exercises no control over

them;--this is called its mysterious operation.

THOU gives birth to them, and DEI nurtures them.
Matter forms them and
functionality completes them.
Because
of this, the myriad creatures respect THOU and esteem DEI-ty.
Respect for
THOU and esteem for DEI-ty are by no means 'conferred' on them,
but always
occurs naturally.
THOU
gives birth to them;
nurtures them
rears them
shelters them

toughens them up
sustains them
protects them.
It
gives birth but does not 'claim' them;
acts but does not 'intend;'
rears
but does not 'control.'
This
is "Mysterious DEI-ty."

Everything
arises

From this total emptiness

Is nourished and completed

And finds creation blessed

All
things arise from nothingness

Are cared for by existence

Which freely gives what is required

For bountiful subsistence

Existence
does not make a claim

On what it has created

It nourishes and serves and leads

Is honored and appreciated

TAO gives them life,

Virtue nurses them,

Matter shapes them,

Environment perfects them.

Therefore all things without exception worship Tao and do homage to Virtue.

They have not been commanded to worship Tao and do homage to Virtue,

But they always do so spontaneously.

It is Tao that gives them life:

It is Virtue that nurses them, grows them, fosters them, shelters them, comforts them, nourishes them, and covers them under her wings.

To give life but to claim nothing,

To do your work but to set no store by it,

To be a leader, not a butcher,

This is called hidden Virtue.

The Tao is the mother of all beings,

The virtue of Tao nurtures them in nature,

The material world gives them form,

Environment and circumstance complete their abilities.

Therefore all things honor the Way, and venerate virtue.

This honoring of the Tao, and the veneration of virtue are not commanded,

They occur spontaneously and for this reason the Way continues to create beings while virtue continues to nurture and develop them.

The Tao gives birth to all, yet it lays no claim of ownership,

It nourishes all, but it does not control,

This is the mystic virtue.

The Tao gives birth to all of creation.

The virtue of Tao in nature nurtures them,

and their family gives them their form.

Their environment then shapes them into completion.

That is why every creature honors the Tao and its virtue.

No
one tells them to honor the Tao and its virtue,

it happens all by itself.

So the Tao gives them birth,

and its virtue cultivates them,

cares for them,

nurtures them,

gives them a place of refuge and peace,

helps them to grow and shelters them.

It
gives them life without wanting to posses them,

and cares for them expecting nothing in return.

It is their master, but it does not seek to dominate them.

This is called the dark and mysterious virtue.

Everything, every behaviour, is a vibratory pattern or process. Such process emerges, develops, and decays, according to the single principle.

People have a natural reverence for the principle, and they naturally love the vibratory energy which obeys the principle.

The vibratory energy and the principle make a partnership, which produces an infinite variety of forms. But the partnership takes no profit from its productivity. Neither does it get its power by making things happen in a coercive manner. There are simply no alternatives; there is no other way.

This partnership between principle and process is the first fact of life and of our work.

The Tao gives birth to All things.

Nature's goodness nurtures them.

Matter forms them.

Environment shapes them.

Therefore, All things cannot help but to respect the Tao and treasure

goodness.

Respect for the Tao and the treasuring of goodness are not demanded

of them, they do it naturally.

So, the Tao gives birth,

Nature's goodness nurtures them.

grows them, raises them and enables them to mature,

ripens them, nourishes and shelters them.

The Tao gives birth, but does not possess;

Acts, but does not take credit;

Guides, but does not control.

This is the mystery of goodness.

The
potential of Infinity manifests all things.

Manifestations are nourished by oneness,

created with matter,

affected by events.

Therefore,
those who maintain peace and harmony

acknowledge Infinity and remember their

oneness,

not because it is demanded,

but because it is the essence of

all things.

Infinity
manifests all things,

rears them,

nurtures them,

clothes them,

feeds them,

protects them,

and comforts them.

Infinity
manifests all things without possessing

them;

shows them the way without interfering,

assists them without taking credit.

This
is the nature of Infinity.

Tao creates, Virtue provides,

Matter assumes form, Power completes.

Thus do all things without exception honor Tao and praise Virtue.

Honor Tao. Praise Virtue.

Not by command, but continually and naturally.

Therefore Tao creates, Virtue provides,

by raising, nurturing, sheltering, nourishing, feeding, and clothing.

Create and do not possess.

Govern, and do not exploit.

Lead, and do not kill.

This is Mystic Virtue.

Tao gives rise to all things;

Virtue nourishes them;

Environment shapes them;

Circumstances complete them.

Therefore the Ten Thousand Things

Respect Tao and honour Virtue.

No one commands that

Tao be respected and Virtue honoured.

Doing so comes spontaneously.

So it is that all things arise from Tao;

They are nourished by Virtue,

Grown and nurtured,

Given shelter and comfort,

Matured and protected.

Tao produces them but does not possess them;

Accomplishes without taking credit;

Guides without interfering.

This is called mystical Virtue.

Things are produced by the Way,

Cultivated by their accumulation through time,

Realized in their forms by substances,

And guided in their development

By the potential in specific circumstances.

Therefore, everything respects the Way

And values what has been accumulated in the culture.

In the respected Way and valued accumulation,

Things grow and develop

By following their natural courses.

That's why we say that things are produced by the Way,

And, through diachronic accumulation, reared,

Cultivated, developed, matured, and protected naturally.

That process is the basic moral model for providers:

Produce without possessing anything,

Achieve without showing off anything,

And lead without making personal decisions.

Tao produces them Te rears them events shape them talents complete their development. And so: Among the thousands of things there are none that do not honour Tao and treasure Te

This honouring Tao and treasuring Te - no one commands it, it always happens naturally. Tao produces them, Te rears them makes them grow, nurses them, settles them, heals them, sustains them, protects them.

Produces but does not possess works but does not rely on this presides but doesn't rule. This is mysterious Te.

Tao creates beings; Te nurses them, raises them, helps to develop, to mature, takes care about them and supports them.

These beings grow as souls, develop, and achieve the Perfection.

Therefore, there is no person who would not be obliged to worship Tao and Te.

Tao and Te coerce no one; They give to all beings the possibility to develop according to one's own freedom of will, in a natural way.

To produce without owning the products, to create without boasting, to be older than others and do not command them! These are the principles of life of Great Te.

The Tao Way creates all things, the Virtue (Te) maintains them.

Harmony is maintained by following the Tao Way,

Values are given to things when the Virtue (Te) is acquired.

By
following the Virtue (Te) things grow and develop,

Things are taken care of, protected, what lives is fed.

Although
everything is contained within Tao,

It looks like is completely empty.

The Wise Person is equally the same,

His virtue is in everything he does.

By not assuming any possession he is thus on the Tao Way.

The
Dao produces them. Virtue nurtures them. Creatures give them form. Power configurations
bring them to completion. For that reason none of the myriad creatures fails
to respect the Dao and to revere virtue. No one orders this respect for the
Dao and reverence of virtue, for it always occurs of its own accord. So the
Dao produces them <and virtue> cultivates them, fosters them, nurtures
them, gives them refuge, gives them peace, rears them, and shelters them. It
produces them without seeking to possess them and acts without exacting gratitude.
It is senior to them yet does not rule over them. It is called the dark and
mysterious virtue.

Tao begets them.

Virtue nurtures them.

Matter gives them form.

Circumstances bring them into completion.

Therefore all things not only respect Tao but also value virtue.

Yet Tao is respected and virtue is valued.

Without being ordered, they come naturally.

Therefore Tao begets them.

Virtue nurtures them, grows them and rears them, perfects them and ripens them, nourishes them and shelters them.

Begetting without possessing;

Acting without asserting;

Developing without controlling;

This is called mystical virtue.

The Power of Impartial Support

The Tao produces;

Its Power supports;

Its Natural Law forms;

Its influence completes.

Thus All Things without exception

Respect the Tao and value its Power.

To respect teh Tao and value its Power -

No one demands this, and it comes naturally.

Therefore the Tao produces and its Power supports;

It advances, cultivates, comforts, matures, nourishes, and protects.

Produce but do not possess.

Act without expectation.

Advance without dominating.

These are called the Subtle Powers.

Everything is a perfect expression of the Dao. In harmony, things take their own course. The ten thousand things are of the Dao. Yet the Dao does not possess any of them. Your nature is to love yourself, and in doing so, loving the Dao, which is all things.

The Way brings forth,

Its virtue fosters them,

With matter they take shape,

And circumstance perfects them all:

That
is why all things

Do honor the Way

And venerate its power.

The
exaltation of the Way,

The veneration of its power,

Come not by fate or decree;

But always just because

By nature it is so.

So
when the Way brings forth,

Its power fosters all:

They grow, are reared,

And fed and housed until

They come to ripe maturity.

You
shall give life to things

But never possess them;

Your work shall depend on none;

You shall be chief but never lord.

This describes the mystic power.

Tao begets all beings,

And De fosters them.

The physical gives them forms,

And the vessels mark them accomplished.

Therefore all beings without exception venerate Tao and value De.

The veneration of Tao and valuing De, is not out of obedience to any orders, but is always like this.

Therefore Tao begets all beings,

And De fosters them, grows and raises them, makes them fruitful and mature, breeds them and protects them.

To give birth to them without taking possession of them,

To put them in motion without vaunting this as its merits,

And to be their sovereign without controlling them,

- These are called the profound De.

The Dao gives life to them; virtue nurtures them, matter gives them physical form, and characteristic potential completes them.

This is why the myriad things without exception must honor the Dao and esteem virtue.

This honoring of the Dao and this esteeming of virtue, none are ordered to do so, yet it always happens spontaneously.

The Dao gives them life, and virtue nurtures them, that is, grows them, rears them, ensures them their proper shapes, matures them, and protects them.

He gives them life yet possesses them not.

He acts, yet they do not depend on him.

They mature, yet he is not their steward.

This we call mysterious virtue.

1. The Way gives birth to them and Virtue nourishes them;

2. Substance gives them form and their unique capacities complete them.

3. Therefore the ten thousand things venerate the Way and honor Virtue.

4. As for their veneration of the Way and their honoring of Virtue—

5. No one rewards them for it; it's constantly so on its own.

6.
The Way gives birth to them, nourishes them, matures them, completes them, rests
them, rears them, supports them, and protects them.

7. It gives birth to them but doesn't try to own them;

8. It acts on their behalf but doesn't make them dependent;

9. It matures them but doesn't rule them.

10. This we call Profound Virtue.

Tao is the source
of all living things,

and they are nourished

by Tao's power.

They are influenced

by the other living things around them,

and they are shaped

by their circumstances.

Everything respects
Tao

and honors its power.

That's just the way it is.

Tao gives life
to all things,

and its power watches out for them,

cares for them, helps them grow,

protects them, and comforts them.

Create something

without holding on to it.

Do the work

without expecting credit for it.

Lead people

without giving them orders.

That's the secret of the power of Tao.

.

Mystical Power

The Way produces all things.

Power nourishes them.

Matter gives them physical form.

Environment shapes their abilities.

Therefore all things respect the Way and honor power.

The Way is respected, and power is honored

without anyone's order and always naturally.

Therefore the Way produces all things,

and power nourishes them,

caring for them and developing them,

sheltering them and comforting them,

nurturing them and protecting them,

producing them but not possessing them,

helping them but not obligating them,

guiding them but not controlling them.

This is mystical power.

Tao gives life to beings Teh preserves them.

Tao shapes them Teh leads them to completion.

No creature therefore that does not revere Tao and love Teh - not in duty bound but of its own accord.

For Tao is the life and support of all their refuge and shield It makes them arise and grow mature and perfect themselves.

It acts without doing It fosters without demanding and guides without commanding.

Such is the mystery of Teh.

The Mystic Virtue

Lao Tze says,

The Tao is the one to give existence;

and its attribute, the Teh, is responsible for nurturing it.

In this way all things are formed.

They are brought forth to maturity according to their condition.

Therefore, all existence without exception honors the Tao and exalts the Teh.

This honoring of the Tao and exalting of the Teh is not decreed through an authority, but through spontaneous tribute.

So it is that the Tao gives existence;

and its attribute, the Teh, completes, matures, maintains and shelters.

It gives life but doesn't claim the possession of it.

It carries all things through their processes but does not boast its ability.

It brings them to maturity, but does not control them.

This is called the mystic virtue.

THE NOURISHMENT OF THE TAO

All
physical things arise

from the principle which is absolute;

the principle which is the natural way.

All
living things are formed by being,

and shaped by their environment,

growing if nourished well by virtue;

the being from non-being.

All
natural things respect the Tao,

giving honour to its virtue,

although the Tao does not expect,

nor look for honour or respect.

The
virtue of the natural way

is that all things are born of it;

it nourishes and comforts them;

develops, shelters and cares for them,

protecting them from harm.

The
Tao creates, not claiming credit,

and guides without interfering.

Every being in the universe

is an expression of the Tao.

It springs into existence,

unconscious, perfect, free,

takes on a physical body,

lets circumstances complete it.

That is why every being

spontaneously honors the Tao.

The Tao gives birth to all beings,

nourishes them, maintains them,

cares for them, comforts them, protects them,

takes them back to itself,

creating without possessing,

acting without expecting,

guiding without interfering.

That is why love of the Tao

is in the very nature of things.

Dao gives birth to All Things.

Its virtue nourishes them.

Its Matter forms them, and its Forces perfect them.

Thus among All Things there is none which does not esteem Dao and envy its virtues.

To esteem Dao and envy its Virtues do not take any order whatever, but follow the eternity of Nature.

Since Dao gives life;

and its virtues nourish it, grow it, cultivate it, accomplish it, mature it, nurse it, and protect it.

It produces All Things but it does not possess them.

It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.

It leads them but does not lord over them.

It is called "the Profound Virtue".

Tao enlivens.

Action nourishes.

Matter forms.

Mechanism completes.

For that reason, all things worship Tao and exalt Action.

The worship of Tao and exaltation of Action are not conferred, but always arise naturally.

Tao enlivens and nourishes, develops and cultivates, integrates and completes, raises and sustains.

It enlivens without possessing.

It acts without relying.

It develops without controlling.

Such is called mystic Action.

LI

Tao
brings all the creatures of the world to be born

And by following the way they come to fill their nature

Thus do they follow the tao and honor virtue

No one asks them to; they do it without thinking

It
creates them but doesn't own them

It supplies them but doesn't make them dependent

It matures them but doesn't command them

This is the ideal of virtue

The Way Gives Birth

The Way gives birth,

virtue nurtures, things form,

momentum completes.

Therefore all beings honor the Way

and value its Virtue.

The honor of the Way

and the value of Virtue

are not granted by anyone,

but are always naturally so.

So the Way gives birth and nurtures,

makes grow and develops,

completes and matures,

builds up and breaks down.

It produces but does not possess;

it acts without presumption,

it fosters growth without ruling.

This is called hidden Virtue.

Everything is born from Tao, and nurtured by Te; shaped by substance, and completed by environment.

Thus, everything follows Tao and is guided by Te.

Tao is honored.

Te is valued.

This is not the result of promotion, but occurs naturally.

This is why everything is born by Tao and nurtured by Te.

Te raises, educates, mentors, coaches, nourishes, and protects everything.

Giving lives without possessing them,

Guiding without forcing,

Developing without controlling,

This is called Profound Te.

The Way gives birth [to all things]; Virtue nourishes; matter shapes; environment perfects.

Therefore all things without exception revere the Way and honor Virtue, although they are not commanded, but left to do so naturally.

Hence, the Way gives birth; Virtue nurses, grows, fosters, shelters, comforts, nourishes, and guards.

It gives birth but does not claim as its own; it does but does not claim its doing; it grows but does not claim to be master.

This is called hidden Virtue.

Teh (virtue) arose from Tao, nourishes everything.

It gives rise to form, body, and individual fulfillment.

Thus, everything respects Tao and values Teh.

The high honor of Tao, the high value of Teh,

are inner values from themselves, not from our valuing them.

Therefore, Teh arose from Tao is able to care for, repress, or destroy.

It gives lives, but not possesses them.

It nourishes them, but not rules over.

This is the Primal Virtue.

The Tao gives life to all things,

and its Virtue nourishes them,

forms each according to its nature

and gives to each its inner strengrth.

Therefore,
the ten thousand things all venerate the Tao

and honor its Virtue.

It has never bccn decreed that the Tao be venerated

and its Virtue be honored;

they have always been so treated spontaneously.

Thus,
the Tao gives life to all things;

and its Virtue raises them, nourishes them,

brings them to their full growth,

feeds, shelters, and protects them.

Giving
life without claiming authority,

benefiting without demanding gratitude,

guiding without control.

This is called hidden Virtue.

The
way creates

its truth sustains

its matter shapes

its energy is the spark of life

There is not one thing that does not know the way

or is not influenced by it

even though there is no instruction to follow

or bill to pay.

It is just so naturally.

As the universe creates everything,

sustains it, shapes it, enlivens it,

you are called

to care for the world but not own it,

use it but not abuse it,

lead but do not control.

This is the way of the universe.

One dao gives them birth, next hidden virtue and glory fosters them.

Matter gives them physical form. some get shaped according to intrinsic designs,
perfected by first being allotted its primal strength.

Sets of circumstances and tendencies complete them.

So all things of the universe worship their intrinsic ways (dao forms) and honour
virtue.

There's hardly one who doesn't honour inborn modes of living and standard accommodations,
so in one way or other all who accommodate likeably do homage to set dao structure,
and concomitant native, later, possibly unfolded growth power. Conclusion: all
things of the universe honour dao and exalt good te without being ordered by
anybody.

From this: the right praise always come spontaneously. And this is so of its
own accord.

Proficient dao hardly needs any right to be worshipped, Hardly does its best
fit, proper unfoldment prowess or power claim the right to be honoured. Its
just like this: Some dao produces them and concomitant, abundant virtue fosters
them. Said in other words:

The
right dao gives them birth,

a proper te fosters them, Dao [deep structure] and might enough can rear and
develop, can feed, nurture and shelter. In other words: grant some harbour of
security, protect and give deep, strong peace in a place fit for that end.

Just the right dao could be a prolongation of some deft was always and of itself
so.

Yes, the right dao gives birth, shields from storms, and seems hardly possessive.
The right shields hardly lay claim to you.

Good dao bore you and the power" of dao evolved or reared you (a bit), made
you grow [naturally, according to innate designs] brewed for you personally,
sort of.

A man must rear others, control some, but never lean upon them.

By such natural designs just dao can act and also help, but it hardly appropriates.

Just be chief among them, but hardly manage them. This can be called the superior
power. See: The superior power hardly controls anybody!

And this is the [program of developing fit] mystic might.

The Way gives birth to them and integrity nurtures them.

Matter forms them and function completes them.

For this reason,

The myriad creatures respect the Way and esteem integrity.

Respect for the Way and esteem for integrity are by no means conferred upon them but always occur naturally.

The Way

gives birth to them,

nurtures them,

rears them,

follows them,

shelters them,

toughens them,

sustains them,

protects them.

It

gives birth but does not possess,

acts but does not presume,

rears but does not control.

This is what is called "mysterious integrity."

Tao brings forth and Teh nourishes.

All things take up their several forms, and natural forces bring them to perfection.

Therefore all things conspire to exalt Tao and to cherish virtue.

But this regard of Tao and Teh is not in deference to any mandate.

It is unconstrained, and therefore it endures forever.

For Tao produces all things, and Teh nourishes, increases, feeds, matures, protects, and watches over them.

To produce without possessing; to work without expecting; top enlarge without usurping; this is the absolute virtue!

Demanding Nothing, Supplying Everything

The Tao demands nothing of your love,

yet it acts in every kiss,

every touch,

and every embrace.

It suffers every insult,

bleeds in every wound,

and flows in every tear

yet never takes offense.

You can always trust it

for it has nothing to prove.

It needs nothing

yet supplies everything.

The acceptance and generosity of the Tao

is difficult to understand and to accept.

Not possessive, demanding, judging or pushing.

Yet full of creativity and power.

Remember that this is your own nature.

It is what you are really like

underneath the scars and behind the masks.

Become yourself and you will become like the Tao.

Tao produces them. Virtue fosters them. Matter gives them physical
form. The circumstances and tendencies complete them. Therefore the ten
thousand things esteem Tao and honour virtue.

Tao is esteemed and virtue is honoured without anyone's order! They
always come spontaneously. Therefore the Tao produces them and virtue
fosters them. They rear them and develop them. They give them security
and give them peace. They nurture them and protect them.

(Tao) produces them but does not take possession of them. It acts, but
does not rely on its own ability. It leads them but does not master
them. This is called profound and secret virtue.

Existence having
born them

And fitness bred them,

While matter varied their forms

And breath empowered them,

All created things render, to the existence and fitness they depend on,

An obedience

Not commanded but of course.

And since this is the way existence bears issue

And fitness raises, attends,

Shelters, feeds and protects,

D0 you likewise

Be parent, not possessor,

Attendant, not master,

Be concerned not with obedience but with benefit,

And you are at the core of living.

The DAO gives birth to everything, the DE looks after everything,

The elements give a shape to everything, and nature makes everything grow and mature.

Therefore, everything respects the DAO and values the DE.

The dignity of the DAO and the nobleness of the DE are not forced upon anything, but allow everything to be natural.

So, the DAO gives birth to everything, the DE looks after everything;

They grow and cultivate everything, making them complete and mature;

They bring everything up and protect them.

Giving birth to everything but not owning them,

Taking care of everything but not claiming the credit,

Leading everything but not controlling them;

This is called real DE.

The Tao begets existence.

Intelligence nurtures existence.

Substance forms existence.

Forces complete existence.

For this reason,

Everything in existence, without exception,

Reveres the Tao and honors Intelligence,

Not by any decree, but with utter spontaneity.

Thus, the Tao begets everything in existence,

And Intelligence nurtures it,

Rears it,

Develops it,

Completes it,

Ripens it,

Sustains it,

Protects it.

Giving birth without possessing,

Availing life without claiming,

Promoting growth without controlling,

These are the Profound Virtues of Kosmic Intelligence.

Things are produced by the Way,

Cultivated by their accumulation through time,

Realized in their forms by substances,

And guided in their development

By the potential in specific circumstances.

Therefore, everything respects the Way

And values what has been accumulated in the culture.

In the respected Way and valued accumulation,

Things grow and develop

By following their natural courses.

That's why we say that things are produced by the Way,

And, through diachronic accumulation, reared,

Cultivated, developed, matured, and protected naturally.

That process is the basic moral model for providers:

Produce without possessing anything,

Achieve without showing off anything,

And lead without making personal decisions.

The Tao is the mother of all beings,

The virtue of Tao nurtures them in nature,

The material world gives them form,

Environment and circumstance complete their abilities.

Therefore all things honor the Way, and venerate virtue.

This honoring of the Tao, and the veneration of virtue are not commanded,

They occur spontaneously and for this reason the Way continues to create beings,

while virtue continues to nurture and develop them.

The Tao gives birth to all, yet it lays no claim of ownership,

It nourishes all, but it does not control,

This is the mystic virtue.

