===== Chapter 20 =====

Get rid of erudition; do not fret.

The saying of "yes" or "indubitably"—

They are removed from each other by how much?

In what way?

The imparting of "good" or "evil"—

In what way do they seem to differ from each other?

But that which the people fear

Is not suited to be disrespected.

Wild indeed, those not yet centered!

The masses of people are boisterous and exuberant

As if enjoying the greatest sacrificial feast.

As if in Spring, climbing onto the lookouts.

I alone am tranquil and quiet indeed, not yet showing these signs—

Like an infant babying those who are not yet children.

Weary, weary, as if no place to belong to!

The masses of people all have surplus

And I alone seem to be missing something.

Mine is the heart of a fool, besides!

Turbid and chaotic indeed, the ordinary people, bright and eminent!

I alone am muddled and confused.

Ordinary people study, survey, and scrutinize.

I alone am bored and uninterested.

The masses of people all have instrumentality

But I alone am both ignorant and lowly.

I alone differ from people

And value the nourishing Mother.

Banish learning, no more grief. Between Yes and No How much difference? Between good and evil How much difference??

What others fear I must fear - How pointless!

People are wreathed in smiles As if at a carnival banquet. I alone am
passive, giving no sign, Like an infant who has not yet smiles. Forlorn
as if I had no home.

Others have enough and more, I alone am left out. I have the mind of a fool, Confused, confused.

Others are bright and intelligent, I alone and dull, dull, Drifting on the ocean, Blown about endlessly.

Others have plans, I alone am wayward and stubborn, I alone am different from others, Like a baby in the womb.

Give up studying and you will have no distress.

Is there a difference between "yes" and "no"?

The good and the evil - are they alike?

Ought I to fear what others fear?

Confusion reigns; it is without end.

All around, people make merry

As if holding a festival in spring,

As if about to gorge at a feast.

I alone remain still and reveal nothing

Like an infant yet unable to smile.

I am forlorn, with no place to go.

Others possess enough to spare,

I alone seem to have nothing.

I seem like a fool; I'm utterly confused.

Other people are bright; so bright.

I alone am dark; so dark.

Other people are smart; so smart,

I alone am dull; so dull.

Ever drifting like the restless ocean,

Blown about like the ceaseless storm.

Other people pursue their goals,

I alone seem foolish and aimless.

Only I am a stranger; I'm unlike the others.

I take nourishment only from the mother.

POOR ME ?

End the study of pretentiousness and surface formality,

And much sorrow, trouble and nuisance will cease.

The distinctions between yes and no, good and evil,

Between what people fear and fail to fear:

- Are often semantic.

- Are often contradictory.

- Are often false.

- Are often superficial.

While many may be content -

Partaking of party and feast,

Viewing the land from a-high in the springtime,

I alone am inert, without animation,

Like an infant who has yet to learn to smile.

Alas ! I am alone, with nowhere to go.

While others appear to have abundant possessions and grace,

I alone appear to have nothing.

I feel inferior, foolish and left out.

While others are clear, bright and confident,

I alone feel muddled, dull and confused.

While others look lively, penetrating and self assured,

I alone feel depressed, aimlessly adrift in sea

Blown by the winds on an ever changing course

While others seemingly have a purpose,

I alone feel awkward.

Wherein am I so different?

I alone value drawing my sustenance from the

mysterious Mother of Nature.

Abandon learnedness, and you will not walk slowly with a troubled head and heart.

I join together certainty with uncertainty so both can be discarded and come close to what is.

I join together the virtuous with the loathsome so both can be discarded and become what is.

People are afraid. They are unable to not be afraid.

Without restraint! They are without limits!

All people are busy, busy.

Like taking part in a great ox feast.

Like in spring climbing a terrace.

I alone remain calm!

I am one who gives no sign, like a newborn baby who does not smile.

Wearied, wearied!

I seem to be a person who has no place to return to.

People everywhere, all have excess.

I alone appear to be deficient.

I am a simple person in my heart and mind!!

Chaos, chaos!

Worldly people display, display.

I alone am dim, dim.

Worldly people are sharp, sharp.

I alone am dull, dull.

Tranquil! I seem like an ocean.

Whirlwind! It never stops.

People everywhere, all have a reason to exist.

I alone am thickheaded, and seem unrefined.

I alone differ from people and treasure being fed by the Mother.

THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE COMMON WAY

To forget learning is to end trouble. The smallest difference in words,

such as 'yes' and 'yea', can make endless controversy for the

scholar. Fearful indeed is death, since all men fear it; but the abyss of

questionings, shoreless and bottomless, is worse!

Consider
the profane man, how he preeneth, as if at feast, or gazing upon

Spring from a tower! But as for me, I am as one who yawneth, without any

trace of desire. I am like a babe before its first smile. I appear sad

and forlorn, like a man homeless. The profane man hath his need filled,

ay, and more also. For me, I seem to have lost all I had. My mind is as

it were stupefied; it hath no definite shape. The profane man looketh

lively and keen-witted; I alone appear blank in my mind. They seem

eagerly critical; I appear careless and without perception. I seem to be

as one adrift upon the sea, with {24} no thought of an harbor. The

profane have each one his definite course of action; I alone appear

useless and uncomprehending, like a man from the border. Yea, thus I

differ from all other men: but my jewel is the All-Mother!

Give up the Booklearning and you may win serenity. The difference betweenyes and certainty, how meaningless -but that between good and evil, howimmeasurably great. The world venerates Booklearning, I can not participate.Perhaps this is limitless delusion. The people glory in their festivals,as if on top of a great tower. I alone am silent, as no message had reachedme of there events, like a child that yet can not smile, deserted, homeless.They all overflow, I alone seem empty. O my foolish heart: I am confused.They appear unperturbed, I alone step in the dark. They appear exuberant,I alone am sad, sad as the sea. Torn apart like a vagrant. They are imbuedwith usefulness, Only I am clumsy like a peasant, I am different from them,Yet I am on my knees before Creative Nature.

When you unlearn what you have learned, you will be free from worries

We've learned that there is but little difference between yes and no, but

That there is a big difference between good and evil

That we have to be scared of what others are scared of

What an endless pack of bullshit

Everybody is restless and excited like they are watching a soccer game

Only I am at rest and unwound and I don't have to do those things and like a child, I want nothing

I'm not attached to anything and don't have to go anywhere in particular

The others already have so much and still they want more

Only I seem to have lost everything

They think I'm crazy and confused

People seem to be bright and clever

And think that I am naive and foolish

It looks like I blow with the wind and don't seem to find rest anywhere

The others seem to know so much

And in their eyes I am nothing but a boor

I am only different because I live according to my nature

If we stop fussing about grammatical trivialities, we will get along much better. The difference between "Yes" and "ya" is insignificant as compared with a genuine distinction like "Good" and "Bad".

Yet some people are as fearful of making a grammatical mistake as of committing a vital error. How stupid to waste our lives in infinite details!

While others enjoy devoting themselves to ceremonious holiday celebrations, such as the spring festivals, I stay at home as unperturbed as a helpless babe.

So while others are feasting, I appear neglected. Am I the one who is a misguided fool?

When everyone else is exuberant, I continue to be disinterested. When everyone else is alert to the niceties of etiquette, I persist in being indifferent. I am as unconcerned as the rolling ocean, without a care to bother me.

While others behave like busybodies, I alone remain placid and resist arousement. How can I withstand the pressure of public opinion? Because I am succored by Mother Nature herself.

Between wei and o

What after all is the difference?

Can it be compared to the difference between good and bad?

The saying "what others avoid I too must avoid"

How false and superficial it is?

All men, indeed, are wreathed in smiles,

As though feasting after the Great Sacrifice,

As though going up to the Spring Carnival.

I alone am inert, like a child that has not yet given sign;

Like an infant that has not yet smiled.

I droop and drift, as though I belonged nowhere.

All men have enough and to spare;

I alone seem to have lost everything.

Mine is indeed the mind of a very idiot,

So dull am I.

The world is full of people that shine;

I alone am dark.

They look lively and self-assured;

I alone depressed.

(I seem unsettled as the ocean;

Blown adrift, never brought to a stop.)

All men can be put to some use;

I alone am intractable and boorish.

But wherein I most am different from men

Is that I prize no sustenance that comes not from the Mother's breast.

Between yes and no, is there really much difference?

Good and bad, are they so far apart?

Must I think as others think?

Alas, there would be no end to fear.

The multitudes are busy with feasts and celebrations.

In spring they climb towers and enjoy the view.

I alone am unmoved, like an infant too young to smile.

Others have more than enough.

I alone have nothing.

My mind is that of a fool—empty.

Others are clear and bright.

I alone am nebulous and dim.

Others are alert and clever.

I alone am withdrawn,

adrift in the ocean,

directionless as swirling wind.

Everyone else has purpose.

I alone am stubborn and untamed.

I am different.

I am nourished by the Dark Mother.

Cut out the academics & avoid the anxieties

The (ready) yes, alongside the (obsequious) yea

What is the distance or nearness between them?

(Even) the good, next to the bad,

What is the difference or likeness between them?

(That) that which the others hold in awe

Will not permit less than awe -

What nonsense! There will never be an end to this, ever!

Everyone (else) is resplendent & festive

As if feasting on great sacrifices

As if in springtime & climbing up towers

I alone am unmoved here, one yet to give a sign

Like a newborn infant, one yet to smile

So worn & weary, as one with no home to come home to

Everyone (else) takes more than enough

While I alone seem forsaken

With only my simpleton's mind!

So muddled & confused

The common folk are bright & sunny

I alone am in chaos & gloom

The common folk are alert & sharp

I alone am torpid & blunt

So placid- in this like the sea

So restless a wind- as if never to stop

Everyone else has purpose

While I alone am wayward, like a rustic

I alone am other than the others

Still enjoying mother's meals

Oneness

Agreement and angry rejection;

How great is the difference between them?

Beautiful and ugly;

What is it like - the difference between them?

The one who is feared by others;

Must I also fear what others fear?

Wild, unrestrained. It will ever come to an end.

The multitudes are peaceful and happy,

Like climbing a terrace in springtime,

enjoying the sacrificial feast of the ox.

But I alone am calm and quiet -

not yet having given any sign.

Like a newborn baby before it learns to smile,

Tired and exhausted,

As though I have no place to return.

The multitudes all have more than they need,

I alone seem to have nothing.

Mine is the mind of a fool - ignorant and stupid!

The common people see things clearly;

I alone am in the dark.

The common people discriminate and make fine distinctions;

But I alone am muddled and confused.

Oh, I am formless!

Like the ocean;

Oh I am shapeless!

As though I have nothing in which I can rest.

The masses all have their reasons for acting;

I alone am stupid and obstinatie like a rustic.

But my desires alone differ from those of others -

For I am nourished by the Mother.

Be done with knowing and your worries will disappear. How much difference is there between yes and no? How much distinction between good and evil?

Fearing what others fear, admiring what they admire-nonsense.

Conventional people are jolly and reckless, feasting on worldly things and carrying on as though every day were the beginning of spring. I alone remain uncommitted, like an infant who hasn't yet smiled: lost, quietly drifting, unattached to ideas and places and things.

Conventional people hoard more than they need, but I possess nothing at all, know nothing at all, understand nothing at all.

They are bright; I am dark. They are sharp; I am dull. Like the sea, I am calm and indifferent. Like the wind I have no particular direction.

Everyone else takes his place and does his job; I alone remain wild and natural and free. I am different from others; my sustenance comes directly from the Mother.

Shut down your intellect, and answer:

Between yes and no, spoken from within,

How little a difference is there,

Compared to that between success and failure?

Why would I fear what others do?

Why must I give my inner consent

To the values of the collective?

Oh! How the desolation around me

Has reached its utmost sunken limit!

The lusty mob is buried in busyness,

As if gathered for a sacrificial feast

(Yet who or what is being sacrificed?)

But I alone-as if from an outpost of vigilance-

Am apart: blank and unmoved,

Like an infant who hasn't yet learned to smile.

Isolated and withdrawn, I am like a homeless man.

Others are absorbed in getting and spending;

While I appear broken and bare of influence.

Others shine with the luminous glow

Of progress, brilliance, and daring;

But I am like a simpleton, vapid and raving.

The world around me teems with cleverness;

I alone retreat into dullness.

With what fathomless depth,

Like a sea-born whirlpool of sound and storm,

Do they ponder and debate-

Ceaseless, directionless, and adamant-

But I alone am obtuse, disturbed, thickheaded,

Like some coarse cloth, unrefinable

And therefore worthless.

Yes, I am different, as are my values:

For I drink from the breast of the Sublime Mother.

The great mass of people are content

as if at the sacrificial feast

or at the spring carnival.

I
alone am serene, quiet, passive,

like a newborn baby unable yet to smile.

I am alone, like one who is homeless.

Others
seem to have abundance

while I seem to live in contemplation.

Perhaps I am the fool, so obscure, so vague.

The
masses seem bright and informed;

I alone seem dull and uninformed.

The masses are clever and smug;

I alone am simple and unassuming.

Alone, as if adrift on the lonely sea.

And
others seem to have useful purpose;

I alone seem impractical and awkward.

I am alone, different.

I choose to be sustained by nature.

Scholarship abandoned, sorrow vanishes.

Yes and yea, are they not almost alike?

Goodness and evil, are they not akin?

Untrammeled and without limits – yet that may not be lightly esteemed which all men reverence.

The multitude are joyful and merry – as though feasting on a day of sacrifice, or ascending a high tower in spring. I alone am anchored without giving any sign – like an infant, undeveloped.

My homeless heart wanders among the things of sense, as if it had nowhere to stay.

The multitude have enough and to spare – I alone am as one who has lost something.

Have I then the mind of a fool? Am I so very confused?

Ordinary men are bright enough. I alone am dull.

Ordinary men are full of excitement. I alone am heavy-hearted.

Boundless as the sea, drifting to and fro, as if without a place to rest.

All men have some purpose. I alone am thick-headed as a boor.

I am alone – differing from others, in that I reverence and seek the Nursing Mother.

Between yea and nay, how much difference is there? Between good and evil, how much difference is there?

What are feared by others we must fear; Vastly are they unlimited!

The people in general are as happy as if enjoying a great feast. Or, as going up a tower in spring. I alone am tranquil, and have made no signs, Like a baby who is yet unable to smile; Forlorn as if I had no home to go to.

Others all have more than enough, And I alone seem to be in want. Possibly mine is the mind of a fool, Which is so ignorant!

The vulgar are bright, And I alone seem to be dull. The vulgar are discriminative, and I alone seem blunt. I am negligent as if being obscure; Drifting, as if being attached to nothing.

The people in general all have something to do, And I alone seem to be impractical and awkward. I alone am different from others. But I value seeking sustenance from the Mother. To know the eternal is to be enlightened. Not to know the eternal is to act blindly and court disaster.

Left without Language

How much separates

'Uh huh' and 'Huh uh'?

What is the separation like between

'worthy' and 'vile'?

What humans fear

cannot not be feared.

Futile! Not focused yet.

The crowd festive

--like enjoying an Easter picnic

or on an Easter sunrise hike.

I, alone, am placid--it's portent not yet clear.

Like an infant not yet a baby.

Languorous!

Like having no refuge.

The crowd all have plenty

I alone treat it as loss.

Mine is the heart-mind of the stupid, indeed.

Indiscriminate!

People of custom are lustrous,

I alone am dull.

People of custom are critically discriminating;

I alone obfuscate.

Bland! It's like the ocean;

drifting! like I have no place to stop.

The crowd all have the-capacity-to

and I alone am dallying and wanton.

I alone am different from humans,

and value nursing at Mother's breast.

What is the difference between the respectful "wei" and the disrespectful "o"?

What is the difference between good and bad?

Where others are afraid, must I be afraid, too?

How extremely ridiculous this is!

The people are rejoicing as if they are enjoying a sacrificial feast,

Or walking up a terrace in the blossoming spring.

How quiescent I am, alone unstirred, like a baby before he knows how to make pleasant expressions.

How aimlessly I wander, with no home to turn to.

People all have many ambitions and desires.

I, alone, seem to have left all of them.

How ignorant I am!

My mind must be that of a fool.

People are glorious and shining.

I, alone, am dark and dull.

People are clever and inquisitive.

I, alone, am obscure and blunt.

How tranquil I am, like the placid sea.

How loftily drifting, as if I am bound nowhere.

People all have their motives.

I, alone, am good for nothing and uncouth.

I am not like the others.

I am nourished by the Mother.

One who renounces learning has no sorrow.

Between the 'yea' and the 'nay', is there much difference?

Between the good and the bad, is there great distance?

Should one fear what other people fear?

If one does not cultivate one's virtue, it is like letting the land lie waste.

Everyone seeks the things that taste good, the joy in life.

I alone am detached and expressionless, like a newborn baby that has not yet learned knowledge or worry.

Everyone wishes for more than they need but I seek to avoid it.

I have the mind of a fool, but pure.

Everyone shows their intelligence; I show only stupidity.

Everyone tries to find profit with sharpness; I alone do not find it.

Others' desire has no end; like the sea, they drift without reaching a goal.

Everyone thinks that they are someone; I only think of myself as no one.

I behave differently to all the others, and only treasure being nourished by the mother of all creatures.

Between "Yes, sir" and "Of course, not!" -

How much difference is there?

Between good and evil -

What difference it is!

He whom the people fear

Cannot but fear the people also.

Faintly, it seems boundless!

The multitude is jubilant,

As if feasting on the Grand Pen,

Or, in springtime, ascending a tower;

I am disinterested, showing no sign whatever,

Like an infant who cannot smile yet;

Fatigued, as if having nowhere to return.

The multitude all has enough and to spare;

I, alone, am destitute.

Mine is a fool's mind indeed, how stupid!

The vulgar are clear-sighted;

I alone am benighted.

The vulgar are discerning;

I alone am muddle-headed.

Dimly, like an ocean!

Faintly, as if endless!

The multitude is all enterprising;

I alone am slow and clumsy.

I wish to be uniquely different from others,

And cherish my nursing mother.

What is actually the difference between "yes" and "no"?

What is actually the difference between good and bad?

Must we fear what others fear?

The complexity is limitless!

In general, the people are happy, as if they were enjoying a royal feast,

Or as if they had climbed to the top of the tower on a spring day.

I alone am indifferent and quiet, I show no signs,

Like a baby who cannot smile yet,

Depressed as if I do not have a home to go back to.

All the others have more than enough,

And I alone, it seems, have a need to make up for what is missing.

Perhaps my thoughts are the thoughts of a fool,

Ignorant of knowledge, despised by everyone!

The vulgar person is bright,

I alone am so dull and toneless.

The vulgar person is clear,

I alone am so dull and opaque.

I am drifting, I am not anchored,

Swinging back and forth, I am not attached.

In general, everybody has something to do,

I alone am at a loose end, aimless.

I alone am different from the others,

But I value the quest for

Existence that comes from the big mother.

Good and bad, like "yes" and "no," are identical in the eyes of the omniscient sage.

But he is afraid of them, since they are infinite, and can therefore not be foreseen.

However, all told, he, the sage, is different from the people.

Between yea and nay

How much difference is there?

Between good and evil

How great is the distance?

What
others fear

One must also fear.

The
multitude are joyous

As if partaking of the offering

Or going up to a terrace in spring.

I alone am inactive and reveal no signs,

And wax without having reached the limit.

Like a baby that has not yet learned to smile,

Listless as though with no home to go back to.

The multitude all have more than enough.

I alone seem to be in want.

My mind is that of a fool - how blank!

Vulgar people are clear.

I alone am drowsy.

Vulgar people are alert.

I alone am muddled.

Calm like the sea;

Like a high wind that never ceases.

The multitude all have a purpose.

I alone am foolish and uncouth.

I alone am different from others

And value being fed by the mother.

Different from the Vulgar

Abandon learnedness, and you have no vexation. The "yes" compared with the "yea," how little do they differ! But the good compared with the bad, how much do they differ!

If what the people dread cannot be made dreadless, there will be desolation, alas! and verily, there will be no end of it.

The multitudes of men are happy, so happy, as though celebrating a great feast. They are as though in springtime ascending a tower. I alone remain quiet, alas! like one that has not yet received an omen. I am like unto a babe that does not yet smile.

Forlorn am I, O so forlorn! It appears that I have no place whither I may return home.

The multitude of men all have plenty and I alone appear empty. Alas! I am a man whose heart is foolish.

Ignorant am I, O, so ignorant! Common people are bright, so bright, I alone am dull.

Common people are smart, so smart, I alone am confused, so confused.

Desolate am I, alas! like the sea. Adrift, alas! like one who has no place where to stay.

The multitude of men all possess usefulness. I alone am awkward and a rustic too. I alone differ from others, but I prize seeking sustenance from our mother.

Without thinking, you cannot worry. There is nothing good or bad. You can neither succeed nor fail. The master may still think of good or bad, but he is aware that it is a thought and simply watches it pass. An ordinary man thinks of good or bad and believes it. This is the difference between enlightenment and delusion. Ordinary people try different hobbies in the pursuit of happiness. The master drifts around doing nothing in particular, indifferent like a baby before it can smile. Ordinary people have an identity. The master has none. Therefore he seems like an idiot. Ordinary people try to shine outwardly through their achievements. The master's achievements are not known by others. The intentions of ordinary people are evident. The master has no intentions. Ordinary people know what to do. The master doesn't. He drifts along like a cloud in the sky. He is different from ordinary people. He is nourished by the Tao.

Between obsequiousness and authoritativeness - what is the difference?

Between beauty and ugliness - is there a difference?

What others fear, do not be unfearful.

Uncultivated, it is because it is unfinished.

Other people are happily gathered, as if readying to partake in an exquisite banquet, to view a spring parade.

I stand alone, quietly, inconspicuously.

Innocently, as if an infant not knowing how to smile;

Aimlessly, as if a wanderer not knowing where to go.

Other people have much to spare;

I, alone, am bare.

Perhaps my foolish heart.

Common people glow;

I, alone, am in the dark.

Common people are alert;

I, alone, am stark.

Other people are skillful;

I, alone, am clumsy and bashful.

I am different from others;

I treasure being embraced by Mother.

If you give up learning, troubles end.

How much difference is there between yes and no?

And is there a difference between lovely and ugly?

If we can't stop fearing

those things people fear,

it's pure confusion, never-ending confusion.

People all radiate such joy,

happily offering a sacrificial ox

or climbing a tower in spring.

But I go nowhere and reveal nothing,

like a newborn child who has yet to smile,

aimless and worn out

as if the way home were lost.

People all have enough and more.

But I'm abandoned and destitute,

an absolute simpleton, this mind of mine so utterly

muddled and blank.

Others are bright and clear:

I'm dark and murky.

Others are confident and effective:

I'm pensive and withdrawn,

uneasy as boundless seas

or perennial mountain winds.

People all have a purpose in life,

but I'm inept, thoroughly useless and backward.

I'll never be like other people:

I keep to the nurturing mother.

Abandon learning, then you will have no worldly concerns.

What difference is there between yes and no? Good and evil?

What people dread, must I also dread?

How confusing! And there is no end to it yet!

The people are merry, like feasting at grand Sacrifices,

Or ascending a ceremonial tower in the Spring.

Uninvolved like an infant yet to giggle;

So weary, like a homeless person!

All the people have enough to spare, I alone seem to be left out;

So unconcerned, as if I have a mind of an ignorant man.

Common folks are clear-minded, I alone seem to be mindless!

Common folks are seriously engaged, I alone seem to be wandering:

Drifting like the vast sea; and

Aimless, like the long wind.

All the people are purposeful, I alone and stubborn and out of step.

I alone differ from others, but do value being sustained by the Mother.

Break
off from studying, there is an absence of grief.

Being
individual or pandering to each other

How do these differ?

Valuing or hating each other

What is the difference?

It
looks like one cannot lack respect for what others put respect in

Such reckless desertion!

It is not yet centered, this way.

Collective
mind is bright and sunny, gay and prosperous

Like enjoying a sacrificial ox

Like ascending a tower in springtime.

The self alone, so moored!

is not yet divined on the tortoise-shell

Like being a baby-child before it smiles.

Unattached, so unattached

The self looks absent of a place to merge.

In
the collective mind each is present of a surplus

Yet the self alone appears to offer as a gift.

The self is foolish, men's minds are also this way

Unclear, so unclear.

Customs
of men are clear, obvious

The self alone is dark, indistinct

Customs of men are curious, scrutinizing

The self alone is tightly closed, shut off.

So
indifferent, it looks like the ocean

Such a gusty wind, it looks ceaseless.

In
the collective mind each possesses a cause

Yet the self alone seems stubborn and rustic

The self alone differs from relating to men

Yet treasures nourishment in relating to the mother.

Give up learning, and you will be free from all your worries. What is the difference between yes and no (about which the rhetoricians have so much to say)? What is the difference between good and evil (on which the critics never agree)? (These are futilities that prevent the mind from being free. Now freedom of mind is necessary to enter into relation with the Principle).

Without doubt, among the things which common people fear, there are things that should be feared; but not as they do, with a mind so troubled that they lose their mental equilibrium.

Neither should one permit oneself to lose equilibrium through pleasure, as happens to those who have a good meal or view the surrounding countryside in spring from the top of a tower (with the accompaniment of wine, etc.). I (the Sage) seem to be colourless and undefined; neutral as a new-born child that has not yet experienced any emotion; without design or aim.

The common people abound (in varied knowledge), but I am poor (having rid myself of all uselessness) and seem ignorant, so much have I purified myself.

They seem full of light, I seem dull. They seek and scrutinize, I remain concentrated in myself. Indeterminate, like the immensity of the oceans, I float without stopping.

They are full of talent, whereas I seem limited and uncultured. I differ thus from the common people, because I venerate and imitate the universal nourishing mother, the Principle.

Cease learning, no more worries

Respectful response and scornful response

How much is the difference?

Goodness and evil

How much do they differ?

What the people fear, I cannot be unafraid

So desolate! How limitless it is!

The people are excited

As if enjoying a great feast

As if climbing up to the terrace in spring

I alone am quiet and uninvolved

Like an infant not yet smiling

So weary, like having no place to return

The people all have surplus

While I alone seem lacking

I have the heart of a fool indeed - so ignorant!

Ordinary people are bright

I alone am muddled

Ordinary people are scrutinizing

I alone am obtuse

So tranquil, like the ocean

So moving, as if without limits

The people all have goals

And I alone am stubborn and lowly

I alone am different from them

And value the nourishing mother

The blind pursuit of learning leads to excessive desires - the more you see, the more you want. Excessive desires, in turn, lead to anxiety and misery. Once we understand this and decide to no longer subject ourselves to information overload, the anxiety and misery disappear as quickly as the mental clutter.

People tend to place too much importance and attachment to value judgments like good, evil, respect and scorn. In reality these are relative variables that change according to perspective. How much do they actually differ, when there are no absolute standards to measure against?

Of course, I always proceed cautiously as a Tao cultivator. Whatever the people fear, I must approach with a healthy dose of caution. If they consider something to be bad, there is probably a reason. I will handle it with care, even though I understand the relative nature of value judgments. In this respect, I am not that different from them.

Still, the great Tao is so vast, seemingly without limits. The gap between the Tao and ordinary people is huge indeed. For the most part, what they do and how they behave are quite different from my way of being.

For instance, see how easily they become happy and excited, as if enjoying a great feast, or hiking up to a scenic spot where they can take in the panoramic view. I, on the other hand, maintain my quietness, tranquility, and the purity of my original nature, like a newborn baby that has not yet learned to smile. My demeanor is not jittery and excitable. Instead, it is slow and low-key, as if I am a weary traveler without a home to return to, and is therefore in no rush.

I notice how the people have too much, while I alone seem to have too little. Their lives are filled with things they do not need, while I carry no excess baggage. My way is minimalist. I possess the bare necessities of life and and the freedom that comes with having few burdens.

It would certainly appear that I have the heart and mind of a fool. I seem so simple and ignorant compared to the shrewdness of ordinary people. They seem so brilliant and logical. They handle everything in a calculating way, while I react slowly and cannot account for every little thing. They scrutinize every detail in everything with a sharp eye, while I am happy enough with a general idea and fuzzy approximations.

My mind is tranquil and still, like the depths of the ocean. At the same time, it is also moving dynamically, like the wind high in the sky. This is something that most people are not likely to understand.

I see them frantically pursuing various goals in the world, displaying their many talents and abilities, trying to get ahead in the rat race. Meanwhile, I appear to be stubbornly persisting in my lowly ways. Why am I so different? It is only because I hold on to the basis of life, the nurturing mother of all things - the Great Tao itself!

Notes

When Lao Tzu talks about not being overly calculating and scrutinizing, he is specifically referring to our conduct in interpersonal relationships. Most people keep track of "scores" - slights, cold shoulders, back stabs, and so on - with great clarity and precision, so that when the time is right they can dole out vengeance and "even the score."

Tao cultivators do not do that. They take action to protect themselves, or distance themselves from malicious people, but otherwise let go of personal affronts without needing to retaliate in kind.

People who do not understand think cultivators must be obtuse to let others take advantage of them like that. They fail to see that, as Gandhi once pointed out, if we all practice "an eye for an eye," pretty soon the whole world will be blind.

In the game of life, those who shrewdly "win" at the expense of others will end up losing big sooner or later. Tao cultivators, in following Lao Tzu's wisdom, seem to "lose" in the short term, only to end up, inexplicably, as the ultimate winners in the long run.

THE OPPOSITE OF THE COMMONPLACE

Avoid learning if you would have no anxiety. The "yes" and the "yea" differ very little, but the contrast between good and evil is very great. That which is not feared by the people is not worth fearing. But, oh, the difference, the desolation, the vastness, between ignorance and the limitless expression of the Tao.

(The balance of this sonnet is devoted to showing the difference between the careless state of the common people and his own vision of the Tao. It is one of the most pathetic expressions of human loneliness, from lack of appreciation, ever written. It is omitted here that it might serve for the closing sonnet and valedictory.)

Eliminate (chüeh) learning so as to have no worries,

Yes and no, how far apart are they?

Good and evil, how far apart are they?

What the sages (jen) fear,

I must not not fear.

I am the wilderness (huang) before the dawn (wei yang).

The multitude (chung jen) are busy and active,

Like partaking of the sacrificial feast,

Like ascending the platform in spring;

I alone (tu) am bland (p'o),

As if I have not yet emerged (chao) into form.

Like an infant who has not yet smiled (hai),

Lost, like one who has nowhere to return (wu so kuei).

The multitudes (chung jen) all have too much (yu yü);

I alone (tu) am deficient (i).

My mind (hsin) is that of a fool (yü),

Nebulous.

Worldly people (su jen) are luminous (chao);

I alone (tu) am dark (hun).

Worldly people are clear-sighted (ch'a);

I alone (tu) am dull (men),

I am calm like the sea,

Like the high winds I never stop (chih).

The multitudes (chung jen) all have their use (i);

I alone (tu) am untamable like lowly material.

I alone (tu) am different from others.

For I treasure feeding on the Mother (mu).

Do away with formal learning and you will not be annoyed by its multitude of details. How much difference between yea and nay? How much difference between good and evil? It is true that what man fear you must also fear, but how very remote the actual occurence.*

The great mass of people are content as if at the sacrificial feast or at the spring carnival. I alone am serene, quiet, passive, like a newborn babe unable yet to smile.

I am alone, like one who is homeless.

Others seem to have abundance while I seem to live in contemplation. Perhaps I am the fool, so obscure, so vague. The masses seem bright and informed; I alone seem dull and uninformed. The masses are clever and smug; I alone am simple and unassuming. Alone, as if adrift on the lonely sea.

And others seem to have useful purpose; I alone seem impractical and awkward. I am alone, different. I choose to be sustained by nature.

* The first paragraph of this chapter was put to the with * marked place in chapter 19.

No more learning, no more trouble.

Is there any real difference between "Ahhh!" and "Yuk!"?

What about "good" and "evil"?

Must I fear what others fear?

Ridiculous!

Everybody else is smiling,

having fun as if at a festival or carnival.

I alone am drifting, not knowing whether I'm coming or going,

like a baby before it has learned to smile.

Others have what they need; I have nothing.

I might as well be homeless.

I'm a fool. Very confused.

Others are bright; I am dim.

Others are sharp; I am dull, lost at sea, without direction.

Others have plans; I am aimless.

I am different from others.

I am nourished by the Great Mother.

Twenty

Give up learning, and put an end to your troubles.

Is there a difference between yes and no?

Is there a difference between good and evil?

Must I fear what others fear? What nonsense!

Other people are contented, enjoying the sacrificial feast of the ox.

In spring some go to the park, and climb the terrace,

But I alone am drifting, not knowing where I am.

Like a newborn babe before it learns to smile,

I am alone, without a place to go.

Others have more than they need, but I alone have nothing.

I am a fool. Oh, yes! I am confused.

Others are clear and bright,

But I alone am dim and weak.

Others are sharp and clever,

But I alone am dull and stupid.

Oh, I drift like the waves of the sea,

Without direction, like the restless wind.

Everyone else is busy,

But I alone am aimless and depressed.

I am different.

I am nourished by the great mother.

How much difference is seen

Between Yes and No?

How much disparity is shown

Between good and evil?

What other people fear

One must fear;

What a difference - so vast and endless!

The multitude are jubilant

As if enjoying a magnificent feast

Or ascending a terrace to command a view of spring scene.

While I, alone and inactive, remain aloof and indifferent,

Like a baby that has not yet learned to smile;

I am tired, like a homeless wanderer.

The multitude all have more than enough,

While I, alone, seem to have nothing.

I am one, indeed, with a heart of a fool.

Vulgar people all look sober and complacent,

While I alone seem muddleheaded.

The multitude all appear clever and capable,

While I alone seem slow-witted and clumsy.

I am indeed different from them all

Because I take the greatest interest in obtaining the Tao.

Banish learning, and you will have no worries.

"Yes" and "yeah" -

How far apart are they?

Good and bad -

How far apart are they?

"What others fear

You must fear."

How outlandish!

It will never end.

Everybody is cheerful,

As if enjoying a great feast;

As if going up to the terrace for the Spring Festival.

I alone am unexcited, giving no sign,

Like a baby who has not yet smiled;

Weary, as if nowhere to return.

Everybody has more than enough,

I alone seem dispossessed.

Mine is the mind of an ignorant man.

How indifferent!

Common folks are bright,

I alone am dark.

They are keen,

I alone am dull.

Adrift, I feel as if on the sea -

Blown by a high wind that seems never to come to rest.

Everybody is put to use,

I alone am stubborn and foolish like a boor.

Alone, different from others, I treasure the nursing mother.

Get rid of the knowledge and you eliminate your worry.

To say 'yes' or to howl 'yes', is there a big difference?

The concepts of good and bad, are they that much different?

Should I also be afraid of what other people are fearful about?

I am yet to make up my mind on these questions.

Nevertheless, everyone is happy, as if having a great feast or a nice picnic in spring.

Singularly, I am feeling tranquil and imperturbable.

I am as innocently naive as an infant.

Feeling lost as if I have no place to go back to.

Everyone seems to be smug while I alone feel inadequate.

I am just a clod and am very bewildered.

Everyone appears to be dazzling, but I am simply lacklustre.

Everyone is astute while I am befuddled.

My thoughts are drifting and ruffling, like an ocean.

My mind is blowing aimlessly like a gale.

Everyone is striving for success and prosperity

While I remain obstinately inane and insignificant.

I know I am different for I am devoted to the study of Dao.

Different from the Madding Crowd

I Su

Forswear learning, and vexation will vanish.

Between an abrupt "Yes" and a gentle "Yea,"

How much is the difference?

Between the good and the bad,

How much is the difference?

What others fear, one should also fear -

What a silly notion!

Whither will it lead?

Merrily, merrily, the multitude is rejoicing,

As if feasting after the Great Sacrifice,

As if mounting the Terrace of Love.

I alone remain indifferent and show no emotion,

Like an infant as yet unable to smile.

Wandering aimlessly,

I look like a homeless tramp.

The multitude all have enough and to spare;

I alone seem to be left on the wayside.

Oh, my mind is indeed like that of an idiot!

So dull, so dull I feel.

The worldlings are bright and cheerful;

I alone feel gloomy and dismal.

The worldlings are smart and self-confident;

I alone feel disgusted and depressed.

Restless like the sea,

I drift along as if never able to settle down.

The multitude all have some worthy employment;

I alone am stubborn and worthless.

I alone differ from other people,

And love to draw nourishment from the Mother.

Give up accumulating knowledge, and you will free yourself from many cares.

After all, what is the diference between "Yes" and Yes, indeed"?

Can it be compared with the difference between Good and Evil?

"What others fear one may not with impunity disregard," people say.

What a dark wilderness divides them from me!

I see men smiling and gay, as if the were taking part in a great festival,

Or mounting a tower to celebrate the coming of Spring.

While I alone am quiet, making no sign,

Like a baby not yet old enough to smile,

Or a tired traveller who has no home to turn to.

The common people live in plenty;

It is only I who seem emptied of everything.

Truly, my heart seems to be theheart of a fool,

So bewildered am I!

The people about me are bright, so bright:

Only I seem to be dull and cast down.

The people about me are so eager and so knowing:

Only I am sad, so sad.

I am restless as the waves of the sea;

I am unmoored, drifting, as one attached to nothing.

All other people have something they are able to do:

Only I am unpractical, like a good-for-nothing.

I alone an unlike other men,

For I hold it of worth to seek nourishment from the all-sustaining Mother.

Give up learning:

You will no anxieties.

How much difference is there

Between ah and oh?

How much difference is there

Between god and evil?

What men fear

Must I fear?

Utter nonsense!

All men are happy happy,

As if consuming sacrificial feasts,

As if mounting the Spring Terrace.

I alone am mild

Like one who gives no sign,

Like an infant who does not smile,

Forlorn like one with no place to go.

All men have plenty;

I alone am a loser

A fool at heart indeed!

The world's people are bright bright;

I alone am dull dull.

The world's people are smart smart;

I alone am low low,

Bland as the sea,

Aimless as the wind.

All men have their uses;

I alone am stubborn and uncouth.

But I differ most from the others

In prizing food drawn from my Mother.

In high truth, is there any difference between yes and no?

Between good and evil, is there any absolute distinction?

Must one fear what everyone fears?

It is still too early for the subtle truth to dawn on those who are so self-assertive.

The people of the world run about excitedly as if they were going to miss the yearly, royal, sacrificial feast,

or as if they were going to be the last one to climb a high tower on a beautiful spring day.

I alone remain quiet and indifferent.

I anchor my being to that which existed before Heaven and Earth were formed.

I alone am innocent and unknowing, like a newborn babe.

Unoccupied by worldly cares, I move forward to nowhere.

The people of the world have more than enough.

I alone appear to have nothing.

The people of the world appear shrewd and wise.

I alone look foolish.

I like to be forgotten by the world and left alone.

Indeed, I have the mind of a single person!

Calm and self-contained, I am like the vast ocean.

Free and seemingly aimless, I am like a gentle wind.

Everyone seems so clever and self-assured.

I alone appear unlearned and original,

insistent upon a different direction than other people pursue.

I alone value taking my sustenance from the Mother.

XX.

Differing
from the Vulgar

Cease
learning many things, we shall have peace;

Between
the flattering yea and honest yes

The
difference is small, but the effect

World-wide,
when good or evil we reject;

The
evil that men fear not, no one fears,

And
wastefulness without restraint appears.

The
multitude of men look satisfied,

They
feed at feasts, they mount on towers of pride,

And I
alone seem timorous and still,

No
signs of promise act upon my will,

A
babe not yet matured, sad and forlorn,

Without
a home, to desolation born.

The
multitude of men have goods to spare,

Tis only
I who wander everywhere

Bereft
of all, with dull and stupid gaze,

Myself
a chaos and my mind a maze.

The
multitude of common men are bright,

And
critical and keen, and full of light,

While
I alone confused appear to be,

Drifting
about on some dark, lonely sea;

The
multitude on doing things are bent,

While
I alone appear incompetent,

A
rustic rude, I differ from all others,

But
oh! the food I prize and seek is Our Eternal Mother s.

Renounce learning, it brings loss to the Inner Life.

How slight the difference between Yes and Yea!

How great the difference between Good and Evil!

That which men fear is indeed to be feared.

When men give themselves up to disorder it never stops.

Many men rejoice and rejoice over a supply of good food, over being in a high and exalted position.

I am calm, I do not feel the slightest emotion, like a new-born child which cannot yet smile at its mother, without attachment to anything, returning always to the Inner Life.

Many men have superfluous possessions.

I have nothing that I value; I desire that my heart be completely subdued, emptied to emptiness.

Men of wealth are in the daylight of prosperity.

I am in the dark.

Men of wealth are endowed with penetration.

I appear confused and ignorant.

Suddenly I am, as it were, on a vast sea, floating on the sea of Inner Life which is boundless.

Many men are full of ability.

I appear to be stupid and rustic.

Thus I am different from other men.

But I revere the Mother, Sustainer of all beings.

Have
done with rote learning,

And
you will have no more frustration.

How
great is the difference between agreement and being the servant?

What
is the difference between "construction" and "destruction"?

Must
I fear what others fear?

What
difficult stupidity this is

!
All are joyous and beaming,

As
though feasting upon a sacrificial ox, As though mounting the Spring Garden;

I
alone am peaceful and give no sign, Like a babe which has not yet smiled.

I
alone am forgotten as one who has no home to return to.

All
have enough and more:

I
alone appear to possess nothing.

What
a not knowing person I am!

What
a confused mind I have!

All
are bright,

bright:

I
alone am dim,

dim.

All
are sharp,

sharp:

I
alone am silent, silent!

Tasteless
like the ocean,

Aimless
like the drifting wind.

All
settle in their paths:

I
alone am stubborn and remain outside.

I
am most different from others

In
knowing

to
take support from

my
Eternal Mother!

Abolish study and you will be free from care.

"What the distinction is between 'yea' and 'aye'", "what the difference is between 'good' and 'evil'"; that "one should stand in awe of what others stand in awe of"; - how vast (is the study of these things)!

There is no end to it!

But when all men are joyous as if celebrating the Great Sacrifice or climbing the heights in spring, then I alone, - so passive, - giving no sign, like an infant that has not yet smiles; - so forlorn, - like one who has nowhere to turn! When all men have plenty, I alone am like one who is left out.

I have indeed the heart of a fool, - so obtuse!

Let ordinary men be bright and intelligent, I alone am stupid and confused.

Let ordinary men be astute and far-sighted, I alone am dull and mope-eyed.

Wan like the waning moon; adrift like one who has nowhere to rest!

Let all men have a purpose, I alone am ignorant like a boor.

I alone am different from others because I prize feeding on "the Mother".

When we renounce learning we have no troubles.

The (ready) 'yes,' and (flattering) 'yea;'--

Small is the difference they display.

But mark their issues, good and ill;--

What space the gulf between shall fill?

What
all men fear is indeed to be feared; but how wide and without end

is the range of questions (asking to be discussed)!

The
multitude of men look satisfied and pleased; as if enjoying a

full banquet, as if mounted on a tower in spring. I alone seem

listless and still, my desires having as yet given no indication of

their presence. I am like an infant which has not yet smiled. I look

dejected and forlorn, as if I had no home to go to. The multitude of

men all have enough and to spare. I alone seem to have lost

everything. My mind is that of a stupid man; I am in a state of

chaos.

Ordinary
men look bright and intelligent, while I alone seem to be

benighted. They look full of discrimination, while I alone am dull

and confused. I seem to be carried about as on the sea, drifting as

if I had nowhere to rest. All men have their spheres of action, while

I alone seem dull and incapable, like a rude borderer. (Thus) I alone

am different from other men, but I value the nursing-mother (the Tao).

Between "Oh, Certainly!," and "Definitely Not;"
how much difference
is there?
Between beauty and ugliness, how great is the distinction?

One
who is feared cannot but be fearful, themself.
How confusing! There
is no end of it all.
Libidinally
joyous are the masses, as though at a feast,
or as if courting on a terrace
in the springtime;
Yet motionless is Ego like a baby before it's first cry,

how dejected!, as if there were no where to turn.
The
masses have more than enough,
but Ego alone is bereft.
Ego has the heart
of a fool. How muddled!
Everyone
else seems bright and clear;
Ego alone seems confused.
How nebulous,
like the ocean!
How blurred, as though without boundaries.
The
masses all serve noble Super-Ego's cause;
but Ego alone is stubborn and uncouth.

Ego is 'different.' Ego is nourished in the Great Mother.

You
need not give a yes or no

Such distinctions matter little

Keep your vision open

And be at center noncommittal

See
that it's ridiculous

To seek success and fear to fail

To ever want what others want

To think you always must prevail

Other
people look so bright

I am dark and void and null

Others are so very sharp

While I alone am dull

Others
are so purposeful

Only I don't understand

Aimless, drifting, weak and dumb

Uninteresting and bland

I
see I'm different from the rest

For I take in what's plainly shown

And I take my sustenance

Only from the great unknown

HAVE done with learning,

And you will have no more vexation.

How great is the difference between "eh" and "o"?

What is the distinction between "good" and "evil"?

Must I fear what others fear?

What abysmal nonsense this is!

All men are joyous and beaming,

As though feasting upon a sacrificial ox,

As though mounting the Spring Terrace;

I alone am placid and give no sign,

Like a babe which has not yet smiled.

I alone am forlorn as one who has no home to retum to.

All men have enough and to spare:

I alone appear to possess nothing.

What a fool I am!

What a muddled mind I have!

All men are bright, bright:

I alone am dim, dim.

All men are sharp, sharp:

I alone am mum, mum!

Bland like the ocean,

Aimless like the wafting gale.

All men settle down in their grooves:

I alone am stubborn and remain outside.

But wherein I am most different from others is

In knowing to take sustenance from my Mother!

Discard relentless learning, and put an end to the anxiety in your harried mind.

What is the difference between yes and no?

What is the distinction between success and failure?

Must the sage fear what all others fear?

How preposterous, these questions can be asked for as long as one seeks enlightenment.

It is to the sage's advantage that he need not fear what others fear.

But it is to the advantage of most that they can enjoy the feast,

and celebrate in the terraced parks in the springtime.

I alone seem tranquil and still amidst the smiling revelers.

I am as expressionless as an infant before it learns to smile.

I do not know the minds of other people,

My mind is that of a fool, muddied and cloudy.

I am alone, with no true home.

Other people have enough and to spare,

I alone seem to have lost everything.

Other people enjoy all they need and more,

I alone have left everything behind.

Other people appear bright;

I alone seem wrapped in darkness.

Other people seem razor-sharp;

I alone am dull.

Other people are lucid,

I alone am obscure.

Everyone seems to know everything,

I alone have no knowledge.

I am like a wave on the ocean;

blowing as aimlessly as the wind, with no place to rest.

Others have purpose, taste and a sphere of action:

I alone am purposeless, unrefined and uncentered.

I do not share the fears of the people,

For creation nourishes me.

Renounce knowledge and your problems will end.

What is the difference between yes and no?

What is the difference between good and evil?

Must you fear what others fear?

Nonsense, look how far you have missed the mark!

Other
people are joyous,

as though they were at a spring festival.

I alone am unconcerned and expressionless,

like an infant before it has learned to smile.

Other people have more than they need;

I alone seem to possess nothing.

I am lost and drift about with no place to go.

I am like a fool, my mind is in chaos.

Ordinary
people are bright;

I alone am dark.

Ordinary people are clever;

I alone am dull.

Ordinary people seem discriminating;

I alone am muddled and confused.

I drift on the waves on the ocean,

blown at the mercy of the wind.

Other people have their goals,

I alone am dull and uncouth.

I
am different from ordinary people.

I nurse from the Great Mother's breasts.

Our job is to facilitate process and clarify conflicts. This ability depends less on formal education than on common sense and traditional wisdom.

The highly educated leader tends to respond in terms of one theoretical model or another. It is better simply to respond directly to what is happening here and now.

Make sure that any model you do have is compatible with traditional wisdom; admire the wise of all religions.

For example, most people act in order to fill their desires. They believe that the world serves them. But the wise leader serves others and is relatively desireless, even defenseless.

Most people are plagued by endless needs, but the wise leader is content with relatively little. Most people lead busy lives, but the wise leader is quiet and reflective. Most people seek stimulation and novelty, but the wise leader refers what is common and natural.

Being content permits simplicity in life. What is common is universal. What is natural is close to the source of creation.

This is traditional wisdom.

Forget ambitious acquisition of knowledge,

and your sorrows will end.

How much difference is there between "yes" and "no"?

What is the distinction between "good" and "evil"?

Must I value what others value? Nonsense!

Having no end to their desires, they are desolate.

People rush here and there, maybe going to a feast,

Or perhaps climbing a tower in the springtime.

I alone am calm and unconcerned.

Like an unselfconscious infant

At peace and having no destination.

Most people have more than they need.

But I alone seem lost and out of place.

I have the mind of a fool--so confused!

Ordinary people are bright.

I alone seem dim.

Ordinary people are discriminating.

I alone am ambivalent.

As quiet as the ocean.

As free as the wind.

People rush about on their very important business.

But I alone seem incorrigible and uncouth.

I am different from ordinary people;

I enjoy feeding from the Great Mother's breasts.

Give
up the pursuit of knowledge and live in peace

and harmony.

Without
knowledge there is no difference

between good and evil.

Is
it necessary to learn to fear what others

perceive should be feared? Nonsense!

Other
people are excited, joyous and festive

as if enjoying a holiday.

I alone am indifferent, without emotion

or expression; like a baby

before it has learned to smile.

Others
have things they feel they need.

I alone own nothing.

I
am like a fool unfettered by knowledge.

Other people are intelligent. I alone am ignorant.

Others are shrewd and cunning.

I alone am untouched and moronic.

I
aimlessly drift on the great tides of the endless

seas

at the mercy of the indifferent winds.

Others have direction, goals and purposes.

I alone flow within the harmony of Infinity.

I
am different from others.

I reside in the peace and harmony of

the Infinite oneness of all things.

Be done with Knowledge and free of worry.

Is not 'Yes' the same as agreement ?

Do not Good and Evil occur together ?

People cannot control their fears,

and the foolishness is not yet over.

Most men are prosperous and happy.

They enjoy great strength, and climb the terraces in Spring.

I alone am silent, giving no sign,

as a new-born babe before its first breath;

exhausted beyond recovery.

Most men have energy to spare.

I alone seem lost, my foolish heart muddled.

Worldly men are clear and manifest;

I alone seem dim and confused.

Worldly men inquire and examine;

I alone am sad and depressed, indifferent as the ocean.

A constant wind has no equal.

Most men have ambition, while I alone am stubborn and provincial.

I alone am unusual among men, seeking the Mother's breast.

Abandon learning and put an end to sorrow.1

What is the difference between 'yes' and 'no'?

What is the difference between good and evil?

Should I fear what others fear

There would be no end to my fear.

The people are happy, as if enjoying the sacrificial feast,

Or at springtime climbing the terrace in the park.

But I alone am unmoved, showing no sentiment,

Like a baby who has yet to learn how to smile.

I am alone and have no home to go to.

Others have more than they need,

Whilst I have nothing.

Mine is the mind of a fool,

Completely muddled!

Others see things so clear cut,

Whilst I am confused.

They see so many differences,

Whilst I see no distinctions.

I am as one adrift on the sea;

I am like a restless wind with no direction.

The people all have a purpose,

Whilst I am aimless and depressed.

I alone am different from the others;

I value seeking nourishment from the Mother.2

1. This line probably belongs at the end of the previous chapter.

2. i.e. the Tao.

How much difference can there be

Between praise and criticism?

How similar goodness is to evil!

Why must one want and do

What everyone else wants and does?

What an absurd expanse of culture!

People hustle and bustle everywhere

As if they were enjoying a grand feast

Or climbing a spring tower.

I sit here, alone, like an infant that cannot giggle yet

And look forlorn as if I am homeless.

Everyone else is acquiring, possessing,

But I seem to be losing all the time.

Am I not foolish, indeed?

While others are decisive,

I am muddled.

While others are quick in judgment,

I am dull-minded.

I am like an ocean that cannot be easily stirred,

Or a wind that has nowhere to dwell.

Other people are intelligent, strong-minded, longheaded,

But I seem simple, foolish, slow.

I am different in that

I value only what provides my nourishment.

Break with Learning, and there will be no trouble. 'Yeah' and 'yes sir' - is there a big difference between them? 'Excellent' and 'despicable' - what's the real difference between them?

"What others hold in respect, we can't fail to respect." Craziness. Aren't we over this yet?

"All the others are beaming and beaming like people enjoying a great ceremonial feast, like people climbing an overlook tower in the spring. I am alone still - no indications at all yet like an infant who hasn't yet even smiled. So sad. Like someone with no place to go home to.

All the others have a superabundance I alone seem to have missed out. Oh my simpleton's mind! So confused.

Ordinary men are so bright I alone am so dull. Ordinary men are so sharp I alone am so stupid. Churned up like the ocean, blown about, like someone with no place to rest.

All the others all have their function I alone am thick-headed, like someone from the back country." I am alone, different from others - treasuring the nourishing Mother.

Cease to keep adherence to the objects to which you are attached, and you will become free from sorrow and pity for yourself! Only by living so one can find the true Base* in life! Isn't this purpose worthy denouncing the common beliefs and habits?

So great is the difference between good and evil!

Do not do anything undesired to others — with this single principle one can reduce chaos and establish order in the society.

But now... all people indulge in vanity... And the society is immersed in chaos...

I alone is calm and do not elevate myself over people. I am similar to a child who has not been born in this world of vanity.

All people are bound by worldly desires. I alone abandoned everything what they value. I am indifferent to this.

All people live in their egocentrism. I alone chose to get rid of it.

I flow as a Stream of Consciousness in Space and do not know when I will stop...

I cognize Tao in my heart! It is so subtle!

I differ from others by valuing That Which created our lives.

* Tao.

By removing the cause of suffering, suffering will disappear.

Both 'Yes' or 'No' are relative.

Be it considered as 'Good' or 'Bad',

The relativity of it still remains.

If other people are afraid of something,

Is this a good cause for us to be afraid as well?

The truth behind could be entirely different.

People
of the world will continue to marry,

Organize festivals and parties.

It's only me without wishes like a baby unable to be happy.

Living without certainty I have no possessions.

People
of the world want to accumulate things,

Nothing I have, some might call me fool.

Other people have acquired knowledge,

I look too simple to attract any interest.

People see great variety of things, I see everything as one.

I look like having no goal like a sea wave moving,

Blown by wind, I seam to go nowhere.

People have aims in their actions that I don't have in mine.

Looking no ordinary, I am on the Tao Way.

Extirpate
study and there will no longer be worries. What difference is there between
a sound of compliance and an angry rebuff? How far is good from evil? "What
people fear one cannot fail to fear.'' How wild and far off the mark! The multitudes
are joyous as though partaking in the tai-lao sacrifice, or as though ascending
the terraces in springtime. I alone am placid like something before there is
even an inkling of it, like an infant before it has learned to smile. Dispirited,
as though having no place to which to return. The multitudes all have an excess,
and I alone seem to have a deficit. I have the mind of a stupid person, so chaotic.
The ordinary people scintillate; I alone am muddled. The ordinary people are
very prying, I alone am closed off. [They are] agitated like the sea, blown
like [they] would never stop. The multitudes of people all have their goals.
I alone am an obstinate fool and seem uncouth. I alone am different from others
and value taking sustenance from the Mother.

Abandon learning; then one has no sorrow.

Between "yes" and "no", what is the difference?

Between good and evil, what is the difference?

If I should fear what the people fear,

Then where is the end of my fear?

Lustily the people seem to be enjoying a feast

Or ascending a tower in the springtime.

I alone am unmoved, showing no sentiment,

Like a baby who does not yet know how to smile.

So weary, I seem not to know where to return.

While the multitudes have plenty,

I alone seem to be left out.

My heart is like a fool's.

How chaotic!

Chaotic!

While the common people are so bright,

I alone am so dull!

While the common people know how to differentiate,

I alone cannot see the difference.

Boundless as the sea,

Aimless as the breeze,

I seem to have no stop.

All the people have their purpose,

But I alone am stubborn and despicable.

I alone differ from the others

And value getting nourishment from the Mother.

Developing Independence

Discard the academic; have no anxiety.

How much difference is there between agrement and servility?

How much difference is there between good and evil?

That one should revere what others revere - how absurd and uncentered!

The Collective Mind is expansive and flourishing,

As if receiving a great sacrifice,

As if ascending a living observatory.

I alone remai uncommitted,

Like an infant who has not yet smiled,

Unattached, without a place to merge.

The Collective Mind is all-encompassing.

I alone seem to be overlooked.

I am unknowing to the core and unclear, unclear!

Ordinary people are bright and obvious;

I alone am dark and obscure.

Ordinary people are exacting and sharp;

I alone am subdued and dull.

Indifferent like the sea,

Ceaseless like a penetrating wind,

The Collective Mind is ever present.

And yet, I alone am unruly and remote.

I alone am different from the others

In treasuring nourishment from the Mother.

Are good and evil different? Do I fear what the next man fears? Such wretchedness. Do not follow who is in front of you for he may fall off a cliff! Drift like a leaf blowing in the wind. Flow like water around an obstruction. Clear your mind and throw your desires away. Nourish yourself in the Dao.

Be done with rote learning

And its attendant vexations;

For is there distinction

Of a "yes" from a "yea"

Comparable now to the gulf

Between evil and good?

"What all men fear, I too must fear"-

How barren and pointless a thought!

The
reveling of multitudes

At the feast of Great Sacrifice,

Or up on the terrace

At carnival in spring,

Leave me, alas, unmoved, alone,

Like a child that has never smiled.

Lazily,
I drift

As though I had no home.

All others have enough to spare;

I am the one left out.

I have the mind of a fool,

Muddled and confused!

When common people scintillate

I alone make shadows.

Vulgar folks are sharp and knowing:

Only I am melancholy.

Restless like the ocean,

Blown about, I cannot stop.

Other men can find employment,

But I am stubborn; I am mean.

Alone
I am and different,

Because I prize and seek

My sustenance from the Mother!

Abandon learning and there will be no sorrow.

How much difference is there between approval and denouncement?

How much difference is there between good and evil?

What others fear cannot but be feared.

It has been so from times of old and the practice doesn't seem to end.

The multitude are so merry, as though going for a great banquet or ascending a height with a broad view in springtime.

I alone am indifferent, with no concern, like an infant that cannot laugh, wearied, indeed, as if I have no home to go to.

The multitude all have more than enough,

I alone seem to lack everything.

My mind is that of a stupid man totally in a muddle.

Common people are so brilliant,

I alone seem to be in the dark.

Common people are so demanding,

I alone seem to be tolerant: so broad and as the boundless sea, so vigorous as the untiring blowing wind.

The multitude have their ability,

I alone seem to be clumsy and incapable.

I alone differ from others, essentially because I have acquired Tao.

Repudiate learning, and stay free of worry.

Really, how distant can approval be from disapproval?

Or, how far apart can praise and censure be?

One feared by others must also fear others accordingly.

A gulf so vast, oh, it is truly infinite!

Common people, caught up in the pursuit of happiness, behave as if feasting at a great sacrifice or ascending a springtime terrace.

I alone am quiet and indifferent, oh, in an entirely premanifest state [weizhao], just like an infant who has not yet smiled,

Utterly aimless, oh, just as if I had no place to go home.

Common people all have more than enough, but I alone seem to have lost all.

Mine is really the heart/mind of a stupid man!

Absolutely amorphous, oh!

Common people are clearly obvious.

But I alone am cryptically obscure.

Common people are meticulously discriminating,

But I alone muddle everything together.

Floating indifferently, oh, as if out on the sea,

Blown about by the wind, oh, I seem to have no place to stop.

Common people all would have purpose.

But I alone am doltish and rustic.

I alone wish to be different from others and so value drawing sustenance from the mother.

1. Agreement and angry rejection;

2. How great is the difference between them?

3. Beautiful and ugly;

4. What's it like—the difference between them?

5. The one who is feared by others,

6. Must also because of this fear other men.

7. Wild, unrestrained! It will never come to an end!

8.
The multitudes are peaceful and happy;

9. Like climbing a terrace in springtime to feast at the tai-lao sacrifice.

10. But I'm tranquil and quiet—not yet having given any sign.

11. Like a child who has not yet smiled.

12. Tired and exhausted—as though I have no place to return.

13. The multitudes all have a surplus.

[13a. I alone seem to be lacking.]

14. Mine is the mind of a fool—ignorant and stupid!

15. The common people see things clearly;

16. I alone am in the dark.

17. The common people discriminate and make fine distinctions;

18. I alone am muddled and confused.

19. Formless am I! Like the ocean;

20. Shapeless am I! As though I have nothing in which I can rest.

21. The masses all have their reasons [for acting];

22. I alone am stupid and obstinate like a rustic.

23. But my desires alone differ from those of others—

24. For I value drawing sustenance from the Mother.

Don't spend
too much time thinking about stupid shit.

Why should you care if people agree or disagree with you?

Why should you care if others find you attractive or not?

Why should you care about the things that worry others?

Call bullshit on all that.

Let other people
get worked up

as they try to enjoy themselves.

I'm not going to give myself away.

A baby doesn't know how to smile, but it's still happy.

Let other people
get excited about stuff.

I'm not going to hang on to anything.

I'm not going to fill my mind with ideas.

I'm not going to get stuck in a rut,

tied down to any one place.

Other people
are clever;

I guess I must be stupid.

Other people have goals;

I guess I must be aimless.

Like the wind. Or the waves.

I'm not like
other people.

I'm getting right with Tao.

.

Drawing Sustenance

Abandon memorizing, and vexations end.

How much difference is there between yes and no?

How much difference is there between good and evil?

Is what people fear really to be feared?

How very remote the actual occurrence!

The people of the world make merry

as though at a holiday feast or a spring carnival.

I alone am inactive and desireless,

like a new-born baby who cannot yet smile,

unattached, as though homeless.

The people of the world possess more than enough.

I alone seem to have lost all.

I must be a fool, so indiscriminate and nebulous.

Most people seem knowledgeable and bright.

I alone am simple and dull.

Most people see differences and are sharp.

I alone make no distinctions,

seeming aimless, drifting as the sea,

like the wind blowing about, seemingly without destination.

People of the world all have a purpose.

I alone seem impractical and out of place.

I am different from others,

and value drawing sustenance from the Mother.

Replace knowledge by wisdom and your ignorance and worry will vanish.

Opinion or certainty do you perceive the difference? Following habit or following conscience do you feel the difference?

What all men honor should not be despised.

How else shall the darkening of the souls end?

The masses follow their lusts and desires as though life were a springtime and a feast without end ....

I am standing still serene and desireless like a newborn babe that does not yet smile like a homeless one whom nothing holds back.

The masses have manifold wants and aims

I am unwanting because of my foolish simple heart.

The masses are rolling on hurriedly like the waves of the sea beaming because of the diversity of their learning.

I am unmoved and dark like the depth of the sea.

The masses are busy and chase after progress

I remain in non-action different and alone ....

But the more different and alone the closer to the common All-one am I the closer to the maternal primordial ground of the Tao

The World And I

Lao Tze says,

When knowledge is discarded, there will be no worries.

Yes, or pretending to say yes, how much are they different?

One is good the other is evil.

The difference is too great.

Most men fear the kings of knowledge, who are certainly formidable.

The world is full of fornication, and its motion cannot be discontinued.

Lasciviousness exceedingly holds people's minds, which they anticipate to enjoy as hungry men at full banquets, as men feel comfortable mounting towers in spring.

I alone keep quiet, as a baby who is not fully grown up, and has no desire in his mind.

To and fro, I walk; I can't find a place to stay.

People all have had sufficiency, while I still remain in destitution.

My behavior is like a fool in people's eyes.

Secular men are fast and make haste; but I do not intend to fetch anything.

Vast is the sea; its water flows to where there is no end.

People all seem to have had great achievement, while I am still naughty and stubborn.

I am different from others.

I rely on the Tao too much, as a baby longing for mother's milk.

BEING DIFFERENT FROM ORDINARY MEN

The
sage is often envied

because others do not know

that although he is nourished by the Tao,

like them, he too is mortal.

He
who seeks wisdom is well advised

to give up academic ways,

and put an end to striving.

Then he will learn that yes and no

are distinguished only by distinction.

It
is to the advantage of the sage

that he does not fear what others fear,

but it is to the advantage of others

that they can enjoy the feast,

or go walking, free of hindrance,

through the terraced park in spring.

The
sage drifts like a cloud,

having no specific place.

Like a newborn babe before it smiles,

he does not seek to communicate.

In the eyes of those

who have more than they need,

the sage has nothing, and is a fool,

prizing only that which of the Tao is born.

The
sage may seem to be perplexed,

being neither bright nor clear,

and to himself, sometimes he seems

both dull and weak, confused and shy.

Like the ocean at night,

he is serene and quiet,

but as penetrating as the winter wind.

Stop thinking, and end your problems.

What difference between yes and no?

What difference between success and failure?

Must you value what others value,

avoid what others avoid?

How ridiculous!

Other people are excited,

as though they were at a parade.

I alone don't care,

I alone am expressionless,

like an infant before it can smile.

Other people have what they need;

I alone possess nothing.

I alone drift about,

like someone without a home.

I am like an idiot, my mind is so empty.

Other people are bright;

I alone am dark.

Other people are sharper;

I alone am dull.

Other people have a purpose;

I alone don't know.

I drift like a wave on the ocean,

I blow as aimless as the wind.

I am different from ordinary people.

I drink from the Great Mother's breasts.

Abandon learning, there will be no worry!

What is the real meaning between Yes and No?

What is the clear distinction between good and bad?

What all men fear, one has to fear.

Most people are busy, busy and never know where to stop.

Most people are happy-go-lucky, as though they are attending a great feast or as though they are ascending a tower for sight-seeing in spring time.

My desire has not yet even started, like an infant who has not yet become a child.

They are rushing and rushing, and never know where to rest.

Most people desire more;

I alone prefer less.

I am simple,

Pure and calm.

Most people feel bright, bright;

I alone seem to be dull.

Most people are searching, searching;

I alone keep quiet, quiet.

Like a calm ocean moving without end.

Most people feel that they have merits;

I alone feel myself useless and worthless.

I alone am different from others and still prefer to drink mother's milk.

How much difference is there between yea and nay?

How much difference is there between beautiful and ugly?

What one fears is what he cannot help but fear.

One is in the wilderness without central ground.

Ordinary people are fulfilled,

Eating delicious food,

Reaching the climax of romance.

I am desireless and without anticipation,

Like a baby who does not yet.

Gathering energy together, entering the abyss beyond the point of no return.

Ordinary people have more than enough,

I am a fool at heart, as a water droplet is to the spring.

People of affairs are bright and intelligent.

I alone am unintelligent.

People of affairs are cunning and clever.

I alone am dull and unsophisticated,

Unnoticed in the depth of the sea,

Looked for in an endless horizon.

Ordinary people are productive,

I alone maintain the living essence within.

I alone stay with a unitary source, as if stubborn.

I want to be wholly different from everyone else,

By taking my sustenance from the mother source.

XX

Agreement
and disagreement, beauty and ugliness

What does it mean to say these are different things?

As a man who is feared by others must inevitably come to be afraid

These things feed each other, endlessly

The
multitudes are ecstatic, impassioned

Like they are on their way to a great fair

I am as unimpressed as an infant that has not yet learned to smile

Detached, as though I were wandering aimlessly over the earth

Such
a fool am I

They have plenty while I am lacking

They see things clearly while I am unsure

Make fine distinctions that are meaningless to me

The
multitudes all have their purpose and their place in life

I alone am uncultured, ill defined

I drift from one thing to another, without form or direction

In truth, though, I differ from them in only one thing

I
want to be nourished by the great tao

Detach from Learning and You Have No Worries

Detach from learning and you have no worries.

How far apart are yes and yeah?

How far apart are good and bad?

The things people fear cannot but be feared.

Wild indeed the uncentered!

Most people celebrate

as if they were barbecuing a slaughtered cow,

or taking in the springtime vistas;

I alone am aloof,

showing no sign,

like an infant that doesn't yet smile

riding buoyantly

as if with nowhere to go.

Most people have too much;

I alone seem to be missing something.

Mine is indeed the mind of an ignoramus

in its unadulterated simplicity.

Ordinary people try to shine;

I alone seem to be dark.

Ordinary people try to be on the alert;

I alone am unobtrusive,

calm as the ocean depths,

buoyant as if anchored nowhere.

Most people have ways and means;

I alone am unsophisticated and simple.

I alone am different from people

in that I value seeking food from the mother.

Studying thoroughly makes people free of worries.

What is the difference between yes and no?

What is the difference between good and evil?

Don't fear when the crowd is afraid.

Why do people feel perplexed?

Because the universe is infinite!

People are cheerful, as if at banquets, and as if sight seeing from a tower in spring.

I show no emotion, like an infant, and as if wandering aimlessly.

People have plenty, but I am alone as if I have lost everything.

I look foolish and stupid.

Ordinary crowds look smart, while I appear naive.

Ordinary crowds look sharp, while I appear dull.

People look deft, while I appear awkward.

I am different from the crowd.

This is because I follow Tao.

Give up learning, and you will have no more worry.

How great is the difference between "yes" and "no"?

What is the distinction between "good" and "evil"?

Must I fear what others fear?

What abysmal nonsense this is!

All men are joyous and beaming, as though feasting upon a sacrificial ox, as though mounting a spring terrace.

I alone am placid and get no mark, like a babe that has not yet smiled.

I alone am forlorn as one who has no home to return to.

All men have more than enough.

I alone appear to possess nothing.

What a fool I am!

What an obscure mind I have!

All men are shining.

I alone am dull.

All men are sharp.

I alone am blunt, riffling like the endless ocean, rambling like the ceaseless wind.

All men have their things.

I alone am stubborn and stupid.

But wherein I am most different from others is in knowing to prize my nourishing mother.

Get ride of knowledge, no more trouble.

What is the difference between yes and no?

What is the difference between good and evil?

What others fear, Must I fear!

People are busy, as enjoying the animal sacrificial feast,

as going to spring outing.

I alone, drifting, not knowing where I am,

as a newborn before learns to smile, without a place to go.

Others have more than they need, I alone are lost, a naive.

Others are clear and bright, I alone, dim and weak.

Others are sharp and clever, I alone, alone, alone,

as drifting in the sea,

carrying by the wind to ...

Others knew what to do,

I alone, stupid and lowly.

I alone, different from others, value the nourishment from Mother.

How great is the difference between "yea" and "yeah"?

How great is the distinction between "good" and "evil"?

Must
I fear what others fear? How silly!

Everyone
else is joyous as if enjoying the greatest feast,

or going up the terraces in spring.

I alone am drifting without direction,

like a baby who has not yet smiled.

I alone am moping as if I had no home.

Everyone else has more than they need,

I alone seem in want.

I have the mind of a fool, how confused I am!

Other people are bright and clever,

I alone am dark.

Other people are alert and self-assured,

If alone am dull and muddled.

I am unsettled like the waves of the sea,

like the restless wind.

Everyone else has a purpose,

I alone am stubborn and awkward.

I am different from other people,

Even so, I am nourished by the Great

Give
up morality and social conventions

and be free of your problems.

What is really the difference between social classes?

Is it like the difference between good and bad?

between theism and atheism?

"That's the way it's always been done"

"Everybody else is doing it"

how artificial!

Everyone else is happy

celebrating the sacrifice of the lamb or the Son

or going to the opening party.

Yet I am alone and motionless

like a baby that has yet to smile

like an old man on a park bench.

Everyone
else has more than enough to eat and

pay the rent and dream and take trips,

I alone have nothing.

My mind is so confused,

I must be stupid.

Everyone else can see the light,

I alone am blind.

Everyone else is happy and well-adjusted,

I alone am depressed.

Yet
I am in motion like the bottom cycles of the ocean tides,

like flotsam and jetsam, never to rest.

Everyone else has a career or a job,

I alone am useless.

But I am also different from everyone else,

because the earth itself feeds me.

Abandon learning and there will be no sorrow.

Between Yes, sir," and Of course not", how much difference is there?

Between good" and bad", how much difference is there?

That which men fear is indeed to be feared;

alas confused, and the end isn't yet.

All
men are wreathed in smiles, ever merry-making,

as if feasting after the great sacrifice, like ascending a tower in spring.

I alone am inert, like a child that has not yet given sign;

Like a new-born child that can't smile yet.

I seem to be without a home, droop and drift, as though I belonged nowhere,
completely unattached.

All men have enough and to spare;

I alone seem to have lost everything; I am like one left out.

Mine is indeed the mind of a very idiot, my heart must be that of a fool,

dull as I seem - muddled, nebulous!

The
world is full of knowing people that shine;

I alone am dull, confused.

I seem to be in the dark.

They look lively and clear-cut self-assured;

I appear alone, depressed, or patient as the sea,

blown adrift, seemingly aimless, never brought to a stop.

All
men can be put to some use; as worldlings have a purpose.

I alone am intractable and boorish, appearing rustic, stubborn and uncouth,
differing from most people,

But I differ most from others in that I prize no sustenance that doesn't come
from the breast of mama mia.

Between "yes sir" and "certainly not!"

how much difference is there?

Between beauty and ugliness,

how great is the distinction?

He whom others fear,

likewise cannot but fear others.

How confusing,

there is no end to it all!

Joyful are the masses,

as though feasting after the great sacrifice of oxen, or mounting a terrace in spring.

Motionless am I, without any sign, as a baby that has yet to gurgle.

How dejected! as though having nowhere to return.

The masses all have more than enough;

I alone am bereft.

I have the heart of a fool.

How muddled!

The ordinary man is luminously clear, I alone seem confused.

The ordinary man is searchingly exact, I alone am vague and uncertain.

How nebulous! as the ocean;

How blurred! as though without boundary.

The masses all have a purpose, I alone am stubborn and uncouth.

I desire to be uniquely different from others by honoring the mother who nourishes.

Dispense with your learning and save yourselves anxiety; the difference between certainly and perhaps is not much after all.

Do they help us to distinguish between good and evil? for one must always by careful of distinctions!

Alas! but the people will never be free of their folly.

They are filled with ambition, as the stallion ox is filled with lust.

I am singular in my bashfulness, I am devoid of ambition, I am undeveloped as a little child.

I am but a waif, a stray, a child without a home.

All others have an excess of good things, but I am as one abandoned.

How foolish and simple am I! I am bewildered.

Everyone sparkles with intelligence, I am alone in my obscurity.

The people are full of discernment; I alone am dull.

I am tossed about like the ocean; I roll am never at rest.

Everyone has something to do; I alone am incapable and without merit.

I alone am estranged from the people, but I glory on the breast of my mother!

A Private Matter

Why be anxious about what others think

concerning the two of you?

Are you building your relationship

on public opinion polls?

Others build their relationships

on the basis of looking good.

The power of your love is hidden from view.

It is not for display.

Others search for ways

to make their relationships exciting.

Yours appears dull to them.

They cannot see deeply enough.

Others strive to accumulate

the trappings of success.

You and your beloved seem unambitious,

settling for simplicity.

Your love comes from a source

others cannot see.

Do not judge your relationship

on the basis of image.

The deepest soul relationships

are very private matters.

Honor the privacy of yours.

Abandon learning and there will be no sorrow. How much difference is
there between "Yes, sir," and "Of course not"? How much difference is
there between "good" and "evil"?

What people dread, do not fail to dread. But, alas, how confused, and the end is not yet.

The multitude are merry, as though feasting on a day of sacrifice. Or
like ascending a tower in the springtime. I alone am inert, showing no
sign (of desires), Like an infant that has not yet smiled. Wearied,
indeed, I seem to be without a home.

The multitude all possess more than enough. I alone seem to have lost
all. Mine is indeed the mind of an ignorant man, Indiscriminate and
dull!

Common folks are indeed brilliant; I alone seem to be in the dark.
Common folks see differences and are clear-cut; I alone make no
distinctions. I seem drifting as the sea; Like the wind blowing about,
seemingly without destination.

The multitude all have a purpose; I alone seem to be stubborn and
rustic. I alone differ from others, And value drawing sustenance from
Mother (Tao).

Leave off fine
learning! End the nuisance

Of saying yes to this and perhaps to that,

Distinctions with how little difference!

Categorical this, categorical that,

What slightest use are they!

If one man leads, another must follow,

How silly that is and how false!

Yet conventional men lead an easy life

With all their days feast days,

A constant spring visit to the Tall Tower,

While I am a simpleton, a do-nothing,

Not big enough yet to raise a hand,

Not grown enough to smile,

A homeless, worthless waif.

Men of the world have a surplus of goods,

While I am left out, owning nothing.

What a booby I must be

Not to know my way round,

What a fool!

The average man is so crisp and so confident

That I ought to be miserable

Going on and on like the sea,

Drifting nowhere.

All these people are making their mark in the world,

While I, pig-headed, awkward,

Different from the rest,

Am only a glorious infant still nursing at the breast.

Whether people listen to me or ignore me, what difference does it make?

Whether people treat me well or not well, what difference does it make?

Although things that others are afraid of I have to be afraid of too,

How big the difference is between them and me!

When everyone is excited, like going to a festival or spring outing,

Only I am quiet, like nothing has happened.

I am like a newborn infant that does not know how to laugh,

Bored and tired, that has no home to return to.

When everyone has so much excess energy, only I am left behind.

I have a fool's heart, so dumb!

Everyone seems bright, only I am dull.

Everyone seems to know everything, only I am confused.

My heart spreads like an endless ocean.

My mind wanders like a boundless wind.

Everyone seems competent, only I am slow and stupid.

I am so different from the others, because I am devoted to the DAO.

To cease unnecessary learning is to be free from unnecessary concerns.

How much difference is there between yes and no?

How much distinction is there between good and bad?

Must one fear what everyone fears or value what everyone values?

In all this, there is no universality, and thus no end to confusion.

Jolly are the masses in chasing after excitement,

As though feasting at a royal feast, or

Ascending a high tower on a spring day.

Quiet am I by abiding in the stillness of being,

Like a newborn babe as yet to even smile,

Being here and now, and having nowhere to go.

The masses all hoard more than they need.

Forgetful of possessing, I alone am bereft.

My mind is like that of a fool, for I know nothing.

The ordinary man is bright, while I alone seem dark.

The ordinary man is clear, while I alone seem muddled.

Without boundary, I am like the vast ocean,

Without restriction, I am like a gentle wind.

The masses all have things to do;

I alone remain stubbornly unoccupied.

Thus, I am uniquely different from the rest,

Honoring the Tao from which I take my sustenance.

How much difference can there be

Between praise and criticism?

How similar goodness is to evil!

Why must one want and do

What everyone else wants and does?

What an absurd expanse of culture!

People hustle and bustle everywhere

As if they were enjoying a grand feast

Or climbing a spring tower.

I sit here, alone, like an infant that cannot giggle yet

And look forlorn as if I am homeless.

Everyone else is acquiring, possessing,

But I seem to be losing all the time.

Am I not foolish, indeed?

While others are decisive,

I am muddled.

While others are quick in judgment,

I am dull-minded.

I am like an ocean that cannot be easily stirred,

Or a wind that has nowhere to dwell.

Other people are intelligent, strong-minded, longheaded,

But I seem simple, foolish, slow.

I am different in that

I value only what provides my nourishment.

Discard relentless learning, and put an end to the anxiety in your harried mind.

What is the difference between yes and no?

What is the distinction between success and failure?

Must the sage fear what all others fear?

How preposterous, these questions can be asked for as long as one seeks enlightenment.

It is to the sage's advantage that he need not fear what others fear.

But it is to the advantage of most that they can enjoy the feast,

and celebrate in the terraced parks in the springtime.

I alone seem tranquil and still amidst the smiling revelers.

I am as expressionless as an infant before it learns to smile.

I do not know the minds of other people,

My mind is that of a fool, muddied and cloudy.

I am alone, with no true home.

Other people have enough and to spare,

I alone seem to have lost everything.

Other people enjoy all they need and more,

I alone have left everything behind.

Other people appear bright;

I alone seem wrapped in darkness.

Other people seem razor-sharp;

I alone am dull.

Other people are lucid,

I alone am obscure.

Everyone seems to know everything,

I alone have no knowledge.

I am like a wave on the ocean;

blowing as aimlessly as the wind, with no place to rest.

Others have purpose, taste and a sphere of action:

I alone am purposeless, unrefined and uncentered.

I do not share the fears of the people,

For creation nourishes me.

