===== Chapter 62 =====

That which the Tao is:

A deep obscurity among the ten-thousand things.

The treasure of kind people.

The sanctuary of unkind people.

Flattering speech can be used to buy and sell honor.

Flattering deeds can be used to increase [the position of] people.

The unkind among people—

Why abandon them to Existence?

Therefore, [when] establishing the emperor

And placing the three high officials

Even though there are salutations [made]

And [so many] jade-wares [that it takes]

An advancing team of four horses [to present them]

[Even this is] not as good as sitting down

And offering this Tao.

Those from of old who considered this Tao to be valuable—

Why [did they do so]?

[Is it] not said:

"The seeking thereby attain;

The guilty are thereby delivered from evil"?

Therefore, [it] become[s] to the world what is precious.

Tao is the mysterious center of all things, a treasure for those who are good, A refuge for those who are not.

Beautiful words can be traded, Noble deeds can enhance reputations, But if people lack them, Why should they be rejected?

When the Son of Heaven is enthroned And the Three Ministers installed,
Presenting jade discs And four-horse chariots Cannot compare to sitting
still And offering the Tao.

The ancients honoured this Tao. Didn't they say: Through it seekers
find, Through it the guilty escape? This is why Tao is honoured under
Heaven.

Tao is the source of the myriad things.

It is the treasure of those who are good.

It is the refuge of those who are bad.

Fine words can buy honor.

Fine deeds can serve as a gift.

Why reject those who are bad?

So when the emperor is installed,

And his ministers appointed,

Do not offer them precious stones and horses

But remain calm, offer the Tao.

Why did the ancients pay tribute to Tao?

Did they not use to say:

"Those who seek get what they seek thanks to Tao.

Thanks to Tao the offenders are saved"?

That is why Tao is the treasure to the world.

THE TREASURED TAO

The Tao, being the source and pivotal support of All Things,

Is a treasure to the virtuous, a refuge for the unworthy.

Fine words, being worthy of honor,

Noble deeds, deserving of respect,

Even the evil and unworthy are not forsaken by the Tao.

Thus now, as in ancient days,

Upon coronations and important appointments of state,

A better gift than worldly things,

Is the quiet offering of the Tao.

The Tao, so prized from antiquity to this day,

Rewarding those spontaneously seeking it,

Freeing the spirit of evil ones,

Is of All Things, most highly treasured.

The ten-thousand things (everything) follow the Tao.

Its mystery is the good person's treasure.

It protects the bad person.

Pleasing words can be used to sell.

Honorable actions bring people together.

Why reject the essence of people who are not good?

The emperor who appoints three ministers to bring precious jade preceded by a team of four horses is not equal to the stillness of advancing the Tao.

We honor the Tao because it came first.

Does it not say that those who seek to attain reality can thus free themselves from wrongdoing?

Thus the act of becoming human is Heaven below's (the sacred body's) treasure.

THE WORKINGS OF THE TAO

The Tao is the most exalted of all things. It is the ornament of the

good, and the protection and purification of the evil.

Its
words are the fountain of honour, and its deeds the engine of

achievement. It is present even in evil.

Though
the Son of Heaven were enthroned with his three Dukes appointed to

serve him, and he were offered a round symbol- of-rank as great as might

fill the hands, with a team of horses to follow, this gift were not to be

matched against the Tao, which might be offered by the humblest of men.

Why
did they of old time set such store by the Tao? Because he that

sought it might find it, and because it was the Purification from all

evil. Therefore did all men under Heaven esteem it the most exalted of

all things.

Tao has of all things the most honoured place. No treasures give goodmen so rich a grace; Bad men it guards, and doth their ill efface.

(Its) admirable words can purchase honour; (its) admirable deeds canraise their performer above others. Even men who are not good are not abandonedby it. Therefore when the sovereign occupies his place as the Son of Heaven,and he has appointed his three ducal ministers though (a prince) were tosend in a round symbol-of-rank large enough to fill both the hands, andthat as the precursor of the team of horses (in the court-yard), such anoffering would not be equal to (a lesson of) this Tao, which one mightpresent on his knees. Why was it that the ancients prized this Tao so much?Was it not because it could be got by seeking for it, and the guilty couldescape (from the stain of their guilt) by it? This is the reason why allunder heaven consider it the most valuable thing.

Everything inclines towards the original balance

It's the bliss of true men

It's a sanctuary for the untruthful

But people flaunt themselves with flattery

They only do nice things in exchange for gratitude

Everybody does that so why shouldn't you?

Therefore the people shout with joy when a new leader comes on the scene

And let themselves be fooled by pomp and circumstance

It's wise not to participate in this

Do you know why the former wise people considered simplicity so important?

Because they experienced that, one who seeks will find

And that the truth sets one free from past and future

Therefore simplicity is most important in this life

Nature is profoundly worth while. It is that which is most worth while for good men, And it is the only real value for bad men.

Flattery may gain favours, and gifts may help one to advance, But bad men know how to flatter and bribe.

Therefore when leaders are installed in office, Better than he who artfully gives lavish gifts and glowing tribute, Is one who, by doing nothing but accepting his natural role as a follower, pays genuine homage.

Why have men always valued Nature? Was it not because Nature submitted humbly to the task of benefiting the good and the bad alike? Is this not the reason why it is the most worth while thing in the world?

Tao in the Universe is like the south-west corner in the house.

It is the treasure of the good man,

The support of the bad.

There is a traffic in speakers of fine words;

Persons of grave demeanour are accepted as gifts;

Even the bad let slip no opportunity to acquire them.

Therefore on the day of an Emperor's enthronement

Or at the installation of the three officers of State

Rather than send a team of four horses, preceded by a disc of jade,

Better were it, as can be done without moving from one's seat,

To send this Tao.

For what did the ancients say of this Tao,

How did they prize it?

Did they not say of those that have it

"Pursuing, they shall catch; pursued, they shall escape?"

They thought it, indeed, most precious of all things under heaven.

Tao is the ground of the ten thousand things.

It is the refuge of the good man

and the guardian of the bad.

Fine speech can buy high rank.

Good deeds can earn respect.

Should one without them be abandoned?

Therefore, on the day the son is crowned

and the three ministers named,

do not send gifts of jade and teams of horses.

Remain still and offer Tao.

Why has Tao been honored since ancient times?

"Seek and you will find; transgress and you will be forgiven."

Is this not the reason?

Above all else, observe Tao.

The way is a sanctum to the myriad beings

A good person's treasure

A less than good person's place of refuge

Elegant speeches may be useful at market

Noble deeds may be useful for promoting someone

(But if) another has less ability

Why waste what they are?

So (when) enthroning the heir to heaven

(Or) installing the three high nobles

Though there be big jade platters in tribute

Drawn by teams of four horses

This is not as good as sitting still (and) offering this path

What purpose had the ancient ones in honoring this way?

Was it not claimed:

"To seek is to find

To claim error is to be forgiven"?

So (this) becomes precious to (all) under heaven

Sin

The Way is that toward which all things flow.

It is the treasure of the good man,

And that which protect the bad.

Beautiful words can be bought and sold;

Honored deeds can be presented to others as gifts;

Even with things that people regard as no good -

Will they be rejected?

Therefore when the Son of Heaven

is being enthroned or the Three Ministers installed,

Though you might salute them with gifts of jade

Preceded by teams of four horses,

That is not so good as siiting still and offering this.

That is the reason why he ancients

valued this - what was it?

Did they not say,

Those who seek with this, will attain,And thodse who commit offenses with this, will escape?

Therefore, it is the most valued thing in the world.

Tao is the hidden secret source of all life. Good men recognize that Tao provides for them and therefore they esteem it. Bad men don't recognize this, but the Tao doesn't stop providing for them.

Beautiful words win some men honours; good deeds buy others acclaim. But the Tao values everyone, not just those who excel. What's the sense in discarding anyone?

Thus, on the day a new king is crowned or powerful ministers installed, while others rush forward with gifts and praises, just be still and offer Tao.

Why have sages prized Tao for so long? Because with Tao, he who seeks finds, and he who has flaws is forgiven. This is why it is the treasure of the world.

Tao is the treasure of all being.

Those who accord with it

Are embraced by it.

And for those who wander,

Its arms remain open.

Eloquence may fetch its price,

Heroic deeds may garner glory,

But only at the brutal cost

Of a person's deepest self.

Is fame worth such a sacrifice?

What if you were called to command

At the coronation of a king-

If the three imperial generals

Marched in state before you,

Leading out majestic stallions,

To confer on you the jade emblem

Of the highest office?

Could such opulence ever equal

The inner gift of simply sitting

Where the Tao resides?

Does this perhaps explain the truth

Of what the ancients have told me?

That when the Tao is your treasure,

You will always receive what is truly yours,

That every error can be corrected,

And that the treasure of Nature

Is already within you.

This verse contains a life-affirming message: there is no such thing as a point of no return, at or beyond which the treasure of Tao is forever lost. However far ego may have made you wander, into whatever dark dead end it might have brought you, return to the treasure is always possible, as long as you have the inner ability to make a choice. Thus, "every error can be corrected," for it is in that simple moment of decision and commitment that the open embrace of the Cosmos is rediscovered.

Tao is at the source of everything:

treasure for the good, refuge for the bad.

Fine words can be sold;

fine deeds can be just a show.

Why then reject the bad?

Therefore,
at the crowning of the emperor

or at the appointment of the three ministers,

rather than present gifts of jade and horses,

present the gift of Tao.

Why
did the ancients value Tao so?

Did they not say the seeker shall find it,

the sinner shall find it and be forgiven?

So is it the treasure of the world.

The Tao has of all things the most honoured place.

It is the good man's treasure, and that which protects the bad man.

Its excellent words may be displayed before all. Its noble deeds assist all men.

Why should a man be cast aside because he is bad?

Hence when the sovereign has been enthroned, and the chief ministers have been appointed, though one escorted by a team of horses, present the jade symbol of office, it would not equal the stilling of the heart, and entering this Tao.

What is the reason that this Tao has been held in such esteem from the beginning? May we not say that is it because those who seek receive, and those who are guilty escape by its (help)? Hence it becomes the most valued things under heaven.

Tao is the source of all things, the treasure of good men, and the sustainer of bad men.

Therefore at the enthronement of an emperor and the appointment of the three ministers, better still than those who present jewels followed by horses, is the one who sitting presents (propounds) this Tao. Why did the ancients prize this Tao? Was it not because it could be attained by seeking and thus the sinners could be freed? For this reason, it has become the most valuable thing in the world.

Good words will procure one honour; good deeds will get one credit.

Construing a Guide

A guide is a mystery among the ten-thousand natural kinds.

A treasure to worthy people.

That which non-worthy people sustain.

Beautiful language can be marketed.

Respectful behavior can augment humanness.

Those who are not worthy, what abandonment is there?

Hence, set up the master of nature and establish the three dukes.

Although one presents jade followed by a team of horses

It is not as good as sitting and promoting this guide.

That which ancient times treated as valuable was guidance.

How can we not say "with seeking you get to have it, with wrongdoing avoid unorthodoxy."

Hence construe the social world's value.

Tao is concealed in the depths of all things.

The worthy value it.

The unworthy are protected by it.

Good words may be traded for honor.

Good works may impress men.

Even if a man is unworthy, Tao will never exclude him.

Although in a great nation an emperor is established,

Ministers are appointed, and

Jade and horses are all decorated,

None of these is a better offer to the nation than Tao.

Tao has been highly esteemed since the remote past.

Why?

Because not searching for it, one obtains it.

Even if one has faults, one is free from them.

Thus, the Tao is the most highly esteemed thing in the universe.

The Tao is the mystery of the myriad creatures.

It is the treasure of good men.

It is the protection of bad men.

Beautiful words of Tao can reach a high rank.

Respectful deeds of Tao can raise a man above others.

Even if a man is not good, why should he be abandoned?

That is why when the emperor takes office and the three ducal ministers are appointed, although gifts such as the ceremonial jade and the carriage and horses are usually given, it is better to offer the Tao.

And the Tao has been valued since ancient times,

so why shouldn't the emperor seek for it every day?

If he can follow this Tao, all sins will be absolved.

That is why the most valuable thing under Heaven is Tao.

The Tao is where

The ten thousand things flow;

The good man's treasure,

That by which the evil man is preserved.

Good words can win one honor;

Good deeds can command esteem from others.

The evil among men -

Why should they be abandoned?

Therefore, in enthroning the Son of Heaven,

Or installing the Three Counselors,

Though one has a jade-disk

That fills one's arms,

Preceding a team of four horses,

It is better to prostrate oneself

And present this.

Why did the ancients treasure this Tao so?

Is it not said:

"What one seeks will thereby be obtained;

What one is guilty of will thereby be pardoned?"

Therefore it was treasured by all under heaven.

A great country is like the drainage basin of the entire world,

Into which all the rivers flow,

It is the field of the entire world,

It is the femininity of the entire world.

Femininity always overcomes masculinity with its calmness of spirit,

Which it uses as a means to lower itself.

Thus the great country lowers itself before the small country,

Before it conquers the small country.

A small country lowers itself before a great country,

Before it conquers the great country.

Therefore some lower themselves to take,

And others lower themselves to gather.

The only wish of a great country is to hold on to and keep its endless subjects,

And the only wish of a small country is to engage in many occupations and tasks.

When they both wish to realize their aspirations,

Both of them together,

The greater of them must lower itself.

The way is the refuge for the myriad creatures.

It is that by which the good man protects,

And that by which the bad is protected.

Beautiful
words when offered will win high rank in return;

Beautiful deeds can raise a man above others.

Even
if a man is not good, why should he be abandoned?

Hence
when the emperor is set up and the three ducal ministers are appointed, he who
makes a present of the way without stirring from his seat is preferable to one
who offers presents of jade disks followed by a team of four horses.

Why was this way valued of old?

Was it not said that by means of it one got what one wanted and escaped the
consequences when one transgressed?

Therefore
it is valued by the empire.

Practise Reason

The man of Reason is the ten thousand creatures' refuge, the good man's wealth, the bad man's stay.

With beautiful words one can sell. With honest conduct one can do still more with the people.

If a man be bad, why should he be thrown away? Therefore, an emperor was elected and three ministers appointed; but better than holding before one's face the jade table [of the ministry] and riding with four horses, is sitting still and propounding the eternal Reason.

Why do the ancients prize this Reason? Is it not, say, because when sought it is obtained and the sinner thereby can be saved? Therefore it is world-honored.

Everything springs from the Tao. It shelters both the good and the bad. Men may try to succeed through their words and actions, but they are of benefit only if they lead to the Tao. There is little value in travelling a lifetime gathering wealth. Ultimately value can only be found in the Tao. Why did the ancient masters value the Tao so highly? Because with the Tao, what you need, you get. Acting in accord with the Tao you are infallible. That is why its value is beyond measure.

Direction,

to myriad matters, is an enclosure;

to people who are good, it is a treasure;

to people who are not good, it can reassure.

Good words gain people's respect;

good deeds gain people's admiration.

Why abandon people who are not good?

Thus, when a King is enthroned, three senior positions are filled.

Though there are precious jades and speedy stallions, the best present is Direction.

Why, through the ages, is Direction so valued?

Is it not because whoever seeks it gets it, and whoever is guilty, with it, receives amnesty?

That is why it is so valued by the world.

Way is the mystery of these ten thousand things.

It's a good person's treasure

and an evil person's refuge.

Its beautiful words are bought and sold

and its noble deeds are gifts enriching people.

It never abandons even the evil among us.

When the Son of Heaven is enthroned and the three dukes installed, parades with jade discs and stately horses can't compare to sitting still in Way's company.

Isn't it said that

the ancients exalted this Way because

in it whatever we seek we find,

and whatever seeks us we escape?

No wonder it's exalted throughout all beneath heaven.

Tao holds secrets of all things.

It is the treasure for good people, and

The protector for bad people.

Fine talks can earn one respect,

Good deeds can elevate one's status.

Then for those who have behaved badly, why abandon them?

Thus:

When crowning a king or installing three ministers,

In spite of their beautiful jade offerings preceded by fast horses,

It would be better to offer them Tao.

What made the ancients value Tao?

Did they not believe that:

You would get what you seek and be forgiven of your sins?

Therefore, it is valued by the world.

That
which is tao is treasurehouse for the 10000 things

Treasure of the valuing man

Place of refuge for the man who is not valuing.

Embellished
words can cause respect to be marketed

Doing valued things can cause lavish praise to enter

Men who are not valuing, why be rejecting their presence?

So
establish the emperor

Install three ministers

Even though it happens

That the gift of the large jade disk is preceded by a team
of horses

It can not compare to sitting, emulating this tao.

Why
did it happen that in ancient times

There were those who treasured this tao?

Did they go without saying

Seek and finding happens

Possess faults and escape from the anomalous happens?

So
it acts as the treasure of the world

The Principle is the palladium of all beings. It is the treasure of the good (that by which they are good), and the salvation of the wicked (that which prevents them from perishing).

It is to it that one should be grateful from affectionate words, and the noble conduct of good people. It is with regard to it, that the wicked should not be rejected.

It is for that reason (for the conservation and development of the part of the Principle which is in all beings) that the emperor and the great ministers were instituted. Not so that they should become complacent with their sceptre and their ancient four-horsed chariot; but in order that they should meditate on the Principle (advancing themselves in their knowledge, and in the development of others).

Why did the ancients make so much of the Principle? is it not because it is the source of all good and the remedy for all evil? It is the most noble thing in the world.

The Tao is the wonder of all things

The treasure of the kind person

The protection of the unkind person

Admirable words can win the public's respect

Admirable actions can improve people

Those who are unkind

How can they be abandoned?

Therefore, when crowning the Emperor

And install the three ministers

Although there is the offering of jade before four horses

None of it can compare to being seated in this Tao

Why did the ancients value this Tao so much?

Is it not said that those who seek will find,

And those with guilt will not be faulted?

Therefore, it is the greatest value in the world

Of all the myriad things in existence, the Tao is the most wondrous and valuable. Good, kind people understand this and treat it as a cherished treasure. Those who do not understand the Tao may not regard it as anything to value, but the Tao still provides for all the necessities they need to stay alive. Water, air, the sun... everything comes from the protective embrace of the Tao.

In following the Tao, the good person attains spiritual refinement, which can then be expressed through spoken or written words. These words are uplifting and admirable, so that when they are revealed to the public, they inspire people.

Good people not only express spiritual truths through words, but also demonstrate these truths in everyday actions. Their honor, integrity and compassion serve as great examples for others.

Those who have not achieved this level of refinement are not capable of inspiring words or actions. And yet, everyone has the potential to become enlightened. Because this is so, the Tao cannot possibly abandon them.

The highest and most important ceremony in ancient China was the crowning of the Emperor and the installation of the Emperor's three ministers. In order to emphasize its significance, the ceremony including offerings of jade and horses. The jade used in the ceremony was extremely rare, large and valuable; the horses were a team of four, each steed the fastest and finest in all of China.

As valuable as these offerings were, the Tao surpassed them all. No material thing could compare to sitting down with an open mind to discuss, explain and get into the Tao. When people have attained an understanding that suddenly resolves their perplexity and liberates them from ignorance, they too will understand that the Tao is truly priceless.

Why did the ancients cherish the Tao so much? It was not because the Tao brought them riches or material comfort. Rather, it was because the Tao helped those who searched for meaning in finding the answer to the ultimate question of life. For those who did not know enough to search, the Tao would not find fault with them. Instead, it allowed them all the time they needed to work through their issues. With infinite patience, the Tao knew that one day, they too would embark on a search of their own. This is why we say the Tao is the greatest treasure of all. The coronation of any ruler from any time in history would pale by comparison.

THE PRACTICE OF TAO

The Tao is the asylum of all things; the good man's treasure, the bad man's last resort. With beautiful words one may sell goods but in winning people one can accomplish more by kindness. Why should a man be thrown away for his evil? To conserve him was the Emperor appointed and the three ministers.

Better than being in the presence of the Emperor and riding with four horses, is sitting and explaining this Tao.

The reason the Ancients esteemed Tao was because if sought it was obtained, and because by it he that hath sin could be saved. Is it not so? Therefore the world honors Tao.

To all beings Tao is the hidden secret (ao):

To the good persons it is their treasure (pao),

To the not good it is that by which they are preserved (pao).

Beautiful speech can go to the market.

Respectable conduct can be bestowed on others.

Those who are not good,

Why discard them?

Therefore on crowning the Son of Heaven,

On appointing the Three Ducal Ministers (kung),

Although there are tributes of jade,

Preceding teams of four horses,

It is better to kneel (tso) and present this Tao.

Why did the ancients honor this Tao?

One does not say that they did it for the purpose of gain,

Rather they wish to be free from offenses (tsui).

Therefore they were the honored under heaven.

Tao is at the source of everything: treasure for the good; refuge for the bad. Fine words can be sold; fine deeds can be but a show. Why, then, refuge the bad?

Therefore, at the crowning of the emperor or at the appointment of the three ministers, rather than present gifts of jade and hourses, present the gift of Tao.

Why did the ancients value Tao so? Did they not say the seeker shall find it; the sinner shall find it and be forgiven? So is it the treasure of the world.

The Tao is the source of all things,

the good man's treasure, the bad man's refuge.

You can buy beautiful words.

You can build your reputation with good deeds.

But even bad people can use beautiful words and perform good deeds.

So when the new emperor is crowned

(and the three ministers of state are installed),

do not send gifts of jade and four–horse chariots.

Instead, be still, and offer the Tao.

The ancients treasured the Tao because, when you seek it, you find it;

through the Tao, even sinners receive forgiveness.

That is why everybody loves the Tao.

Sixty-two

Tao is source of the ten thousand things.

It is the treasure of the good man, and the refuge of the bad.

Sweet words can buy honor;

Good deeds can gain respect.

If a man is bad, do not abandon him.

Therefore on the day the emperor is crowned,

Or the three officers of state installed,

Do not send a gift of jade and a team of four horses,

But remain still and offer the Tao.

Why does everyone like the Tao so much at first?

Isn't it because you find what you seek and are forgiven when you sin?

Therefore this is the greatest treasure of the universe.

The Tao is the innermost recess of all things;

It is what the good man cherishes

As well as what the bad man wants to keep.

With the Tao, beautiful words can buy respect;

Beautiful deeds can be highly regarded.

How can the bad man desert the Tao?

Hence when the emperor ascends the throne and appoints three ducal ministers,

It would be better to present to the emperor the Tao than jade disks followed by a team of four horses.

Why did ancients value the Tao so much?

Was it not said that by making use of the Tao

One could get what one desired

Or avoid punishment when committing an offense?

That is why it is valued so mush in the world.

Tao

Is the sanctuary of the ten thousand things,

The good man's treasure,

The bad man's refuge.

Beautiful words can buy honor,

Beautiful deeds can benefit people.

Though a man may be bad,

How can he be abandoned?

Therefore, on occasion of crowning the Son of Heaven

Or installing the three ministers of state,

Rather than present a large disc of jade, accompanied by a team of four horses,

Better remain in your seat and offer a tribute of this Tao.

Why did the ancients honor this Tao?

Did they not say:

"You get thereby what you seek;

You escape thereby when you have sinned."

Therefore they regarded it as the most precious of all things under Heaven.

Dao is the safe haven for all beings.

The good people value it.

The bad people receive protection from it.

Words consistent with Dao will place you in a coveted position.

Deeds consistent with Dao will make you stand out from the crowd.

Even if people are bad, Dao will not reject them.

There are important events as such coronation and swearing in of ministers.

In these pompous ceremonies, officials carrying precious jade lead the procession followed by four thoroughbreds.

This largess becomes insignificant when compared to simply presenting Dao as a gift.

Why has Dao always been valued since antiquity?

It is as the saying goes:

"If you seek it, you will get it; if you make an error, you will be forgiven."

Hence, Dao is valued by all.

Practicing Tao

Wei Tao

Tao is a mystery within all things.

It is a treasure to the good men;

To the bad men it gives protection.

Fine words may be shown at the market place;

Noble deeds may serve as gifts to people.

Some people may not be good,

But why should any of them be discarded?

Therefore, when an emperor is enthroned,

Or when the three chief ministers are installed,

Though they may have fine pieces of jade

Respectfully presented before the team of horses,

There is nevertheless nothing better for them

Than to sit (in meditation) and advance in Tao.

For what reason did the ancients prize this Tao?

Did they not say:

"With Tao one finds what one seeks,

And can get pardoned for one's offenses"?

Hence Tao is highly prized by the world.

The Tao is the sanctuary of all creatures in the world.

It is the good man's treasure, the bad man's refuge.

With high-sounding words honours are easily acquired;

With spectacular deeds credit is easily acquired.

But the bad must no be rejected either.

Therefore: when an emperor is enthroned,

And the three Ministers are appointed,

He who comes bearing gifts of jade,

Followed by a retinue of four horses,

Should be less highly prized than he who, without moving, brings the gift of the Tao.

Why was the Tao so highly prized by the Ancients?

Was it not because this could be said of it:

He who seeks it shall receive it,

Sinners seking it sahll be freed from sin.

That is why they thought it the most precious of all things.

Tao is the refuge of the ten thousand tings:

The treasure of the good man,

The backstop of the not-good man.

Fine words can be sold,

Noble deeds gain respect.

If a man is not good,

Why throw him away?

When an emperor is crowned

Or the three ministers appointed,

Discs of jade and teams of horses

Are not as gifts the equal

Of siting still and offering Tao.

Why did the ancients prize Tao?

Because if it is sought, it is found;

Because the guilty are forgiven.

That is why it is beneath-heaven's treasure.

The subtle essence of the universe supports all things.

It is a treasure to virtuous people,

yet it is a refuge for unvirtuous people too.

Good words will find their market.

Good deeds may be presented as a gift to another.

Though a person has strayed from the right path,

the all-encompassing subtle essence of the universe will never abandon him.

Hence, at the enthronement of an emperor,

or the appointment of the three highest ministers of the empire,

rather than present them with discs of jade and teams of fine horses,

show them the priceless subtle Way of the universe.

Why did the ancients esteem the subtle Way of the universe?

Didn't they say that a seeker will find nothing,

but that he can be free from all transgression?

That is why it is such a treasure to the world.

LXII.

Attending
to the Tao

Tao
is the hidden refuge of all things,

To
the good man his richest treasure brings,

And
to the bad in guardianship it clings.

Its
beautiful words buy honor by their use,

Its
noble deeds lift people from abuse,

And
even the bad, are they from it cut loose?

So
when the emperor, chosen to his throne,

Appoints
three great ones, by high titles known,

If
one of these should come to him, alone,

Holding
the jade-screen, with four homes fleet,

He
would
be less
than one on lowly seat

Who
could the lessons of the Tao repeat.

Why
did the ancients prize this Tao so much?

Was
it not because it answered every touch,

And
that the sin-bound, even, escaped thereby?

So it
is most prized of all beneath the sky.

He who has the Tao is the refuge of all beings.

He is the treasure of the good man,

He is the support of the man who is not good.

Beautiful words through Tao gain power,

Man, by following it gains steadfastness in action,

But, by the evil man, its possession is ignored.

The Son of Heaven sits enthroned,

His three Ministers are appointed.

One carries inj his hand a tablet of jade:

Another is followed by a mounted retinue,

But the one who is most values sits quietly, and offers as his gift this Tao.

How was the Tao prized by men of Old?

Daily they sought for it.

They found it, hid within the Self.

It gives a way of escape to the guilty.

Therefore it is prized by all men.

The Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

is the hidden Source

of all things.

A treasure

to the honest,

it is a protection

to the confused.

A good word

will find its own location.

A good deed

may be used as a gift to another.

A person

missing the right path

Is no reason

they should be thrown away.

At the official times of empowerment,

Let others offer their discs of jade, following it up with cars and boats;

It is better for you to offer

the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

without moving your feet!

Why did the people of the past prize

the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )?

It is because

by the virtue (the power) of it,

he who looks finds,

And the guilty are forgiven.

That is why

it is such a treasure

to the world.

The Way for the ten thousand things is like the southwest corner of the house.

It is the treasure of the good and the refuge of the not-good.

Fine words may buy honours, fine conduct may raise one above others.

Therefore, when the Son of Heaven is inaugurated or the Three Ducal Ministers are installed, though they may hold a jade disk and are preceded by a chariot and four, it would be better for them to sit still and make progress in the Way.

Why did the ancients prize this Way so highly? Did they not say: "he who seeks, finds by it; he who trespasses, escapes by it"?

Therefore it was the most prized in All-under-heaven.

Tao has of all things the most honoured place.

No treasures give good men so rich a grace;

Bad men it guards, and doth their ill efface.

(Its)
admirable words can purchase honour; (its) admirable deeds

can raise their performer above others. Even men who are not good are

not abandoned by it.

Therefore
when the sovereign occupies his place as the Son of

Heaven, and he has appointed his three ducal ministers, though (a

prince) were to send in a round symbol-of-rank large enough to fill

both the hands, and that as the precursor of the team of horses (in

the court-yard), such an offering would not be equal to (a lesson of)

this Tao, which one might present on his knees.

Why
was it that the ancients prized this Tao so much? Was it not

because it could be got by seeking for it, and the guilty could escape

(from the stain of their guilt) by it? This is the reason why all

under heaven consider it the most valuable thing.

The Path is the Alembic of the myriad creatures;
it is the treasure
of the good person,
and that which is treasured BY the 'bad.'

Beautiful
words can be traded;
Noble deeds can be used as gifts of honor.
Why
should we reject even the 'bad' others offer us?!
Therefore,
when a Child Of Heaven is enthroned,
or a Triune Ministry installed,

although they may have large and valuable ornaments
and be preceded by teams
of four horses,
it would be better for them to sit down
and make progress
in THIS!
Why
did the ancients value THIS so highly?
Did they not say;
"Seek and ye
shall find;
Repent and thou shalt be forgiven"?
Therefore
THIS is valued by all under heaven.

I'm
at the center and the source

Of all ten thousand things

Where I receive the benefits

That pure awareness brings

These
benefits belong to all

To good and bad the same

For nature gives you what you need

With no regard for praise or blame

Words
and deeds of excellence

May bring you honor and acclaim

But nature values each alike

And is indifferent to fame

When
new leaders are installed

Don't send gifts or lofty praise

Stay centered in the unity

Provided by the inward gaze

Why
should you esteem the void?

It does away with imperfection

Those who seek are bound to find

It disappears on close inspection

THE Tao is the hidden Reservoir of all things.

A treasure to the honest, it is a safeguard to the erring.

A good word will find its own market.

A good deed may be used as a gift to another.

That a man is straying from the right path

Is no reason that he should be cast away.

Hence, at the Enthronement of an Emperor,

Or at the Installation of the Three Ministers,

Let others offer their discs of jade, following it up with teams of horses;

It is better for you to offer the Tao without moving your feet!

Why did the ancients prize the Tao?

Is it not because by virtue of it he who seeks finds,

And the guilty are forgiven?

That is why it is such a treasure to the world.

The Way is sanctuary: the mysterious secret of the universe.

It is the treasure of peaceful people and the bad man's refuge.

Honors can be bought with flattery and fine words;

admiration can be procured through good deeds.

But the Tao does not abandon even the sinner.

Therefore when the Emperor is crowned, and the three ministers appointed,

do not offer gifts of jade and fine horses, offer instead the lessons and learning of the Tao.

Why is it the ancient Masters esteemed the Tao?

It is because one who looked for it could find it.

And the guilty find forgiveness through it.

For these reasons it is truly the treasure of the world.

The Tao is the tabernacle of creation,

it is a treasure for those who are good,

and a place of refuge for those who are not.

How
can those who are not good be abandoned?

Words that are beautiful are worth much,

but good behavior can only be learned by example.

When
a new leader takes office,

don't give him gifts and offerings.

These things are not as valuable

as teaching him about the Tao.

Why
was the Tao esteemed by the ancient Masters?

Is it not said: "With it we find without looking.

With it we find forgiveness for our transgressions."

That is why the world can not understand it.

A person does not have to join a group or be a wise leader to work things out. Life's process unfolds naturally. Conflicts resolve themselves sooner or later, whether or not a person knows how things happen.

It is true that being aware of how things happen makes one's words more potent and one's behaviour more effective.

But even without the light of consciousness, people grow and improve. Being unconscious is not a crime, it is merely a lack of a very helpful ability.

Knowing how things work gives the leader more real power and ability than all the degrees or titles the world can offer.

That is why people in every era and in every culture have honoured those who know how things happen.

The Tao is the bosom of the Universe

It is the good person's treasure

And the bad person's refuge.

Flattery may buy one's position

And good deeds can win people over

But if one's heart is not pure

That is All the more reason to cling to the Tao!

Therefore when a king is coronated,

Crowned in ceremony,

Presented with gifts of rare value, And escorted in luxury,

All these things pale when compared to the humble gift of the Tao,

offered in silence.

Why did the Sages of old value the Tao so much?

Because, when you seek, you find

And when you sin, you are forgiven.

That is why the Tao is the greatest treasure of the Universe.

Infinity
is the potential of all things;

the source of all manifestations.

It
is the treasure of peaceful people

and the hiding place of the bad.

Flattery
can purchase advancement.

Good deeds can obtain admiration.

If
a man is bad,

do not distinguish his badness.

See his oneness with humanity.

Therefore,
when the king is crowned

and the state officials are sworn in,

do not send them gifts of jade dishes

or a team of four horses.

Instead flow in peace and harmony

and remind them of their oneness

with humanity.

Why
does everyone flow in peace and harmony

when they acknowledge the oneness of

Infinity?

Because their needs are met

and their mistakes are not distinguished.

This
is the gift of Infinity.

The Way is the secret of all things.

Treasured by good men, it protects the bad.

Pleasing words may persuade.

Noble deeds can influence.

But of bad men, why abandon them ?

Therefore, at the coronation of the Son of Heaven,

at the installation of the three ministers,

although there be jade discs, followed by teams of horses,

nothing will compare to presenting this Tao.

Why has this Tao been treasured of old ?

Is it not said that to confess wrongdoing is to be forgiven ?

Therefore it is exalted under Heaven.

The Ten Thousand Things have their source in the Tao.

It is the treasure of the good man, and the refuge of the bad.

Fine words can purchase honour.

Good deeds can earn respect.

Even if a man is bad, that is no reason to abandon him.

Therefore when the Son of Heaven1 is crowned and the three ministers installed,

Rather than offering gifts of jade discs and a team of four horses,

It is better to remain seated and offer the Tao.

Why did the ancients value the Tao so highly?

Did they not say, 'By means of the Tao,

Those who seek it shall find it, and the guilty shall be forgiven'?

This is why it is so valued by the world.

1. i.e. the Emperor.

The Way is the pacifier appreciated by all.

It is the treasure of the wise and the shelter for the unwise.

Eloquent words can win respect.

Kind deeds can win praises.

Since the unwise are not affected,

Why should they be given up as hopeless?

Therefore,

It is better to sit down and present the Way

Than to present a king and officials to the world

And to give them a precious jade

And a carriage and four horses at the ceremony.

Didn't the ancient wise ones rightly appreciate the Way

Because it can both satisfy our needs

And forgive us for our sins and folly?

That is why the Way is the most respected.

Tao is the honoured center for the thousands of things. The treasure of the good what protects the not good.

Elegant words can buy and sell fine conduct gets people promoted. People who are not good, why are they rejected?

Yes: When they are enthroning the Son of Heaven or installing the Three Ministers - although they are presenting in tribute jade medallions out in front of four-horse teams, this cannot compare to sitting and setting forth this Tao.

What was the reason that the ancients treasured this Tao? is it not said: "By it the seeker obtains by it the guilty escapes." Yes: It is the Treasure of the World.

Tao is the deepest Base of everything. It is the Treasure of those who aspire to It. But it also acknowledges the existence of evil people.

Yes, one has to preach the purity and kind behavior to all people. Nevertheless, aren't evil people necessary?

They help one to cognize the ephemerality of earthly treasures and the illusiveness of hopes for eternal staying on the Earth in one's current body.

In interaction with them, the people of good make efforts on changing themselves on the path to Tao — so that to become farther from evil as much as possible. After all, in order to become unreachable for evil, one must perform concrete actions on developing oneself as a consciousness...*

Many people would not strive to become better if evil people did not "help" them!

The earthly rulers possessing absolute power and their servants value their jewelry and luxury chariots... Yet in reality, they are not better than those living in solitude and calm and walking the Deepest Path to Tao! Wouldn't it be better for those earthly rulers to lead calm life and dedicate it to cognition of Tao?

People say that in ancient time no one aspired to earthly wealth, and the criminals were not executed. In those ancient times, people worshipped Tao...

* Such examples are given, in particular, in the book How God Can Be Cognized. Book 2. Autobiographies of God's Students.

The Tao way is the way of light.

For good people it is a treasure, the weak run away.

Good
words will gain people's hearts,

By good deeds respect is obtained.

But the Tao Way is above all,

The one who can see it is truly bathes in light.

To
choose a leader, not richness or human experience is necessary,

But his proficiency of the Tao Way is essential.

Why
the ancient did appreciate those of the Tao Way?

Because they were loved by people!

The
Dao is sanctum for the myriad creatures. It is the treasure of the good person,
and what protects the person who is not good. How can people who are not good
be abandoned? Beautiful words can be marketed [to people]. Fine behavior can
be presented to people. So in enthroning a Son of Heaven or in installing one
of the three great ministers, reverently offering a jade ceremonial disk as
a preliminary to presenting a chariot and team of four is not as good as kneeling
to offer this Dao. Why was this Dao esteemed in antiquity? Is it not said: "By
it one attains with {out?} seeking. By it one escapes from one's transgressions?''
Therefore it is prized by the world.

Tao is the refuge of all things:

The treasure of the good man and the shield of the bad man.

Beautiful words can be for sale.

Good deeds can become gifts to others.

If a man is bad, can he be forsaken?

Therefore when the king is crowned and the three dukes are installed,

Though large, priceless jade preceding a team of four horses can be offered,

It is not as good as sitting down and offering this Tao.

Why did the ancients treasure this Tao?

Wasn't it said:

"With this Tao, the seeker will obtain, and the guilty will be spared"?

Therefore it is valued by the world!

The Tao in Leaders

The Tao is a refuge for All Things,

The treasure of the good,

The protector of the not good.

Honor can be bought with fine words;

Others can be joined with fine conduct.

So if some are not good,

Why waste them?

In this way the Emperor is established;

The three officials are installed.

And although the large jade disc

Is preceded by a team of horses,

This is not as good as sitting,

Advancing in the Tao.

Why did those of old treasure the Tao?

Did they not say:

Seek it and it is attained;

Posses faults and they are released?

Thus it is the treasure of the world.

You cannot achieve the Dao. Nor can you possess it. It equally accepts the good and the bad. When you make a mistake, you are forgiven.

Like the gods of the shrine in the home,

So the Way and its mystery waits

In the world of material things:

The good man's treasure,

The bad man's refuge.

Fair
wordage is ever for sale;

Fair manners are worn like a cloak;

But why should there be such waste

Of the badness in men?

On
the day of the emperor's crowning,

When the three noble dukes are appointed,

Better than chaplets of jade

Drawn by a team of four horses,

Bring the Way as your tribute.

How
used the ancients to honor the Way?

Didn't they say that the seeker may find it,

And that sinners who find are forgiven?

So did they lift up the Way and its Virtue

Above everything else in the world.

Tao, as the abyss where all things are hidden, is effective and precious to good men, and must also be preserved by bad men.

Eloquent words can purchase honour from others,

And admirable deeds can put one above others,

How can it be abandoned by men, even in their evil deeds?

Therefore, when the Son of Heaven mounts the throne and the principal ministers come to their places,

It is better to offer Tao as a present (without any ceremonies),

Though there is the round jadeware, followed by the four-horse chariot.

Why is Tao so much valued from the old days on?

Can it not be said that (with it) one can get what he seeks for and be forgiven his sin?

Thus it is valued by all under Heaven.

The Dao is the shelter of the myriad things.

It is the treasure of the good man

And the protector of the man who is not good.

Fine words can be used to market it, and noble behavior can be used to influence others by it.

As for men who are not good, how could they ever be discarded?

Thus the son of Heaven is established, and the three dukes are installed.

Although one could promote it by providing them with disks of jade to hold and teams of four horses to lead, this falls short of promoting this Dao by just letting them sit quietly.

How did the ancients show their esteem for the Dao?

Did they not say:

"When beseeching it, one obtains, and, when in violation of it, one is forgiven"?

Thus it was that it was esteemed by all under Heaven.

1. The Way is that toward which all things flow.

2. It is the treasure of the good man,

3. And that which protects the bad.

4.
Beautiful words can be bought and sold;

5. Honored deeds can be presented to others as gifts;

6. [Even with] things that people regard as no good—will they be rejected?

7. Therefore, when the So of Heaven is being enthroned or the Three Ministers
installed,

8. Though you might salture them which disks of jade preceded by teams of four
horses,

9. That's not so good as sitting still and offering this.

10. The reason why the ancients valued this—what was it?

11. Did they not say, "Those who seek, with this will attain, and those who
commit offenses, with this will escape"?!

12. Therefore, it's the most valued thing in the world.

Every living
thing

gets its strength from Tao.

Good people respect the value of Tao.

The wicked and foolish don't,

but Tao provides for them anyway.

Some people
gain power and prestige through fancy words,

others through great deeds.

But Tao is available to everyone,

not just the powerful.

So don't look down on anybody.

When people
become powerful,

and everybody lines up

to kiss their ass,

sit still and stay right with Tao.

Why have the
Masters

always respected Tao?

Because when you get right with Tao,

you can always find

what you need to get by,

and trouble can never find you.

The Way is Valued

The Way is sacred to all things.

It is treasure for the good and sanctuary for the bad.

Fine words can buy honor.

Good deeds can gain respect.

Though there be bad people, why reject them?

Therefore at the crowning of the emperor

or at the installation of the three ministers,

instead of sending gifts of jade and a team of four horses,

remain still and send the Way.

Why did the ancients prize this Way?

Did they not say, "Seek, and you will find;

let go, and you will be forgiven."

Therefore the Way is valued by the world.

Tao is a refuge for all beings treasure of the good and support of the not-good.

Words coming form it produce perfection.

Works caused by it, lead to realization.

The not-good, too, it guides to completion.

Mightier than the highest ruler stronger than all those in power more secure than those possessing most is the man who rests in Tao.

That is why Tao has since olden times ranked highest:

Because it is attained by one who surrenders because it saves him who knows that it is the savior Tao of all creation the home and the shelter.

The Most Valuable Thing

Lao Tze says,

The Tao is the refuge for all existence, a treasure to men of correctitude, and a guard of less capable men.

Its admirable words can purchase honor;

its noble deeds can raise a man above others.

The less capable man should not be rejected.

That's why there is the king being selected as the Son of Heaven, and three premier ministers are arranged on their positions.

Although riding chariots pulled by four horses and studded with precious stones is a great honor,

it is even more honorable to ride on a chariot which is made of the Tao.

Why was it that the ancients prized this Tao so much?

Was it not because it could be found by seeking, and the guilty could be pardoned by it?

This is the reason why the whole world considered it the most valuable thing.

SHARING THE TREASURE

The
source of all things is in the Tao.

It is a treasure for the good,

and a refuge for all in need.

Whilst
praise can buy titles,

good deeds gain respect.

No
man should be abandoned

because he has not found the Tao.

On
auspicious occasions, when gifts are sent,

rather than sending horses or jade,

send the teaching of Tao.

When
we first discover the natural way,

we are happy to know that our misdeeds

are in the past, where they belong,

and so are happy to realize

that we have found a treasure.

The Tao is the center of the universe,

the good man's treasure,

the bad man's refuge.

Honors can be bought with fine words,

respect can be won with good deeds;

but the Tao is beyond all value,

and no one can achieve it.

Thus, when a new leader is chosen,

don't offer to help him

with your wealth or your expertise.

Offer instead

to teach him about the Tao.

Why did the ancient Masters esteem the Tao?

Because, being one with the Tao,

when you seek, you find;

and when you make a mistake, you are forgiven.

That is why everybody loves it.

Dao is the wonder of All Things.

Perfection is what people like.

Imperfection is what people dislike.

Beautiful words may be used for markets.

Beautiful deeds may be used for pride.

If a person is imperfect why should he be ignored?

Hence, the "Son of Heaven" was installed and the three dukes (Ministers) were appointed,

Even though one has abundant jade and wealth to establish war horses and chariots, it is not as good as to consolidate and advance Dao.

For what reasons did the ancients bless this Dao?

Is it not said that:

"Whatever is prayed for is obtained.

Whoever has sin is forgiven."?

Thus Dao becomes the blessing of the world.

Tao is the conductor of all things.

The treasure of the good.

The protector of the bad.

Beautiful words can advertise well.

Noble conduct brings praise to people.

As for those who conduct the bad, why reject them for it?

Therefore, after the crowning of the emperor comes the appointing of three administrations.

Being presented with jade in front of the team of four horses is not better than sitting and entering thus.

The reason why this is valued of old is,

It allows having without asking, and it allows forgiveness of wrong.

Thus, it is most valuable to the world.

LXII

The
tao is that towards which all things flow

It honors the good man and the bad man alike

Praise
can be bought or sold, privilege can be given as a gift

Even the bad can acquire them this way; will they be refused?

So if you would offer a gift to a new leader

Though you might shower him with wealth, or jewels, or adulation

You'd do better to sit quietly and let him have the tao

There is a reason the ancients valued this above all else

'Whether you would attain something or be absolved

You will succeed only by following the tao'

It can not be given, only found

Therefore its value is immeasurable

The Way Is the Pivot of All Things

The Way is the pivot of all things:

the treasure of good people,

the safeguard of those who are not good.

Fine words can be sold,

honored acts can oppress people;

why should people who are not good abandon them?

Therefore to establish an emperor

and set up high officials,

one may have a great jewel

and drive a team of horses,

but that is not as good

as advancing calmly on this Way.

Why did the ancients value this Way?

By it one can attain without long seeking

and escape from the faults one has;

therefore it is valued by the world.

Tao is the law of the universe.

For able people Tao is a treasure.

For less able people, Tao is a guardian.

Good words can win reverence.

Good behavior can win admiration.

For people who are inept, should they be abandoned?

Therefore for the emperor who is enthroned and the three senior administrators who are appointed, there may be priceless jades and fast carriages, none is as good as adopting Tao.

Why Tao is so treasured by generations?

Is it not because it helps us reach our goals and avoid mistakes?

Therefore it is treasured by the whole world.

The Way is the shelter of all things, the treasure of the good, and the refuge of the bad.

A beautiful word may bring admiration.

A precious deed may bring a high rank.

That a man is not good is not a reason that he should be cast away.

Hence, at the enthronement of an emperor, or at the appointment of the three ministers, the offering of jade and four-horsed carriages is not as good as the kneeling presentation of the Way.

Why did the ancients prize the Way?

Is it not because they said that "by virtue of it he who seeks finds, and the guilty are forgiven"?

That is why it is such a treasure to the world.

Tao, treasures of everything.

The treasure of good man.

As a sanctuary for the bad man.

The sweet words can buy honor.

Good (or false) deeds can gain respect.

Those bad people,

how can we distinguish them?

Crown the emperor,

Install three ministers.

Compare with jade and a team of horses,

it is better sitting in these offices.

The ancient value these offices, saying,

they demand, they get.

They do crimes, yet not guilty.

So, the world value those offices.

The Tao is to the ten thousand things

what the shrine is in the home.

It is the treasure of the virtuous

and the protection of the wrongdoer.

Good
words are appreciated.

Good deeds deeds accepted as gifts.

Even
the wrongdoers are not abandoned.

Hence,
on the day an Emperor is installed

and appoints the three ducal ministers.

remain where you are and make an offering of the Tao.

It will be preferable to a gift ofjade discs

followed by a team of fonr horses.

Why did the ancients value the Tao?

Was it not because through it

you can find what you seek,

and because of it

you can escape what is hounding you?

Therefore,
it is the most valuable thing under heaven.

Atheism,
like a fireplace,

offers warmth in the cold

to the good and bad person alike.

Arguing for or against god is a profitable business

charismatic speakers and serious writers are well respected

even bad people buy their books and attend their talks.

Therefore

for your brother's wedding or sister's graduation

instead of offering money or a vcr

sit

and send your reflections on the way.

About
the way the elders of the past have said

Seek, and you will find

Apologize, and you will be

doned.

These
are benefits of the way

better than anything else.

Dao is thought up as the mysterious secret of the universe, it could be the
storehouse of "all things", like the pivotal worship centre in the south-west
corner in the [old Chinese] house. It's the good man's treasure and the bad
man's support and resort.

Fine
words can buy honour, fine sayings can be sold. Fine deeds can win respect from
others. The best conduct is a gift. Persons of noble, grave demeanour are accepted
as gifts.

Even if a man is bad, when has (dao) rejected him? Why reject bad people [the
winners of tomorrow if all goes fine]? Even the bad let slip no opportunity
to acquire gifts that fit them well enough.

Therefore
on the crowning of an emperor and appointing his three ministers of the state,
rather than send ta disc of jade and teams of four horses, sit down and deliver
this dao. It can be done without moving from one's seat.

What did the old ones say of this dao, how did they prize it? Why did they treasure
such dao?

Did
they not say of those that have it "Pursuing, they shall catch; pursued, they
shall escape?" Or, "Search for the guilty ones and pardon them?" Or, "Those
who seek shall have it, those who sin shall be freed"?

They thought [common] dao to be the most precious, the treasure of the world.

The Way is the cistern of the myriad creatures;

It is the treasure of the good man,

And that which is treasured by the bad man.

Beautiful words can be traded,

Noble deeds can be used as gifts for others.

Why should we reject even what is bad about men?

Therefore,

When the son of heaven is enthroned or the three ministers are installed,

Although they may have large jade disks

And be preceded by teams of four horses,

It would be better for them to sit down and make progress in this.

What was the reason for the ancients to value this so highly?

Did they not say:

"Seek and thou shalt receive;

Sin and thou shalt be forgiven"?

Therefore,

It is valued by all under heaven.

Tao is the secret guardian of all things.

It enriches the good man and forfends the evildoer.

Its counsel is always in season; its benevolence is always in demand.

Even those who are not good it does not forsake.

Therefore, when the Emperor takes his throne and appoints his nobles, he who comes before him bearing the insignia of a prince and escorted by a mounted retinue is not to be compared with one who humbly presents this Tao.

For why did the ancients hold it in such esteem?

Was it not because it could be had without much seeking, and because by means of it man might escape from sin?

For this it was esteemed the greatest thing in the world.

You Are Bound Together by Strands of Soul

What draws you together

and keeps your passion alive?

Not your economic needs.

Not your fear of loneliness.

Not your habits.

These may bind lives together

but they are not the bindings of your love.

You are bound together by strands of soul,

spun from the deepest regions of your hearts.

Invisible to the casual eye,

these are the ties that bind you.

There are surely habits and mutual needs

that are part of your life together.

But remember the deeper reasons,

the intangible mysteries,

the seeming magic of your love.

Weave the fabric of your life

with these threads.

Tao is the storehouse of all things. It is the good man's treasure and the bad man's refuge.

Fine words can buy honour, And fine deeds can gain respect from others. Even if a man is bad, when has (Tao) rejected him?

Therefore on the occasion of crowning an emperor or installing the
three ministers, Rather than present four large pieces of jade preceded
by teams of four horses, It is better to kneel and offer this Tao.

Why did the ancients highly value this Tao? Did they not say, "Those
who seek shall have it and those who sin shall be freed"? For this
reason it is valued by the world.

Existence is
sanctuary:

It is a good man's purse,

It is also a bad man's keep.

Clever performances come dear or cheap,

Goodness comes free;

And how shall a man who acts better deny a man who acts worse

This right to be.

Rather, when an emperor is crowned, let the three

Ministers whom he appoints to receive for him fine horses and gifts of jade

Receive for him also the motionless gift of integrity,

The gift prized as highest by those ancients who said,

'Only pursue an offender to show him the way.'

What men in all the world could have more wealth than

they?

The DAO is the protector of everything.

Kind people treat it like a treasure;

Unkind people also seek its protection.

The DAO makes people say nice words, and thus, they are respected.

The DAO makes people do good deeds, and thus, they are greater.

Even for the unkind people, have you ever seen the DAO neglect them?

Therefore, being an emperor or a minister, receiving jade gifts, or being equipped with fast carriers are not as precious as having the DAO.

Why did the ancient people value the DAO?

Did they not say that it is for gaining things and redeeming sins?

So the DAO is the most valuable thing in the world.

The Tao is the Innermost of all life,

The treasure of the virtuous who is centered therein,

And the refuge of the non-virtuous who has gone astray.

Beautiful words arising from the Tao will find an appreciative audience,

Noble deeds arising from the Tao will make great contributions to people,

And even if a person may have gone astray,

the Tao will not abandon him.

Therefore, on the day a new emperor is crowned or new ministers installed,

Rather than rushing to offer them discs of jade or teams of horses,

Simply be still and show them the Tao.

Why did the ancients esteem the Tao so highly?

Did they not say that with the Tao,

Those who seek find what they seek

and those who go astray are forgiven?

This is why the Tao is esteemed as the greatest treasure of the world.

The Way is the pacifier appreciated by all.

It is the treasure of the wise and the shelter for the unwise.

Eloquent words can win respect.

Kind deeds can win praises.

Since the unwise are not affected,

Why should they be given up as hopeless?

Therefore,

It is better to sit down and present the Way

Than to present a king and officials to the world

And to give them a precious jade

And a carriage and four horses at the ceremony.

Didn't the ancient wise ones rightly appreciate the Way

Because it can both satisfy our needs

And forgive us for our sins and folly?

That is why the Way is the most respected.

The Way is sanctuary: the mysterious secret of the universe.

It is the treasure of peaceful people and the bad man's refuge.

Honors can be bought with flattery and fine words;

admiration can be procured through good deeds.

But the Tao does not abandon even the sinner.

Therefore when the Emperor is crowned, and the three ministers appointed,

do not offer gifts of jade and fine horses, offer instead the lessons and learning of the Tao.

Why is it the ancient Masters esteemed the Tao?

It is because one who looked for it could find it.

And the guilty find forgiveness through it.

For these reasons it is truly the treasure of the world.

