===== Chapter 43 =====

The softest [things] in the world

[Are like] swift, galloping horses

[To] the hardest [things] in the world.

Non-existence enters no-space.

We therefore know

That the occurrence of non-action is advantageous.

The teaching of no-words

The advantages of non-action—

The world rarely matches them.

The softest thing in the world rides roughshod over the strongest.
No-thing enters no-space. This teaches me the benefits of no-action.

Teaching without words Benefit without action - Few in this world can attain this.

The soft things of the world can overcome the hard ones.

Those that have no substance can penetrate the solid.

Therefore I know non-action wins success.

Teaching without words,

Succeeding without action -

These are understood by the very few.

SOFTNESS AND YIELDING

As water will wear away stone,

So the softest and most yielding will overcome the hardest and most obstinate.

Being without substance, it penetrates the spaceless.

Hence the value of the silent action - The actionlessness of Wu-Wei.

Indeed, few understand - Teaching without words,

Work without doing.

Heaven below (the sacred body) has perfect flexibility and moves like a galloping horse.

Heaven below has perfect strength.

Not being penetrates emptiness.

I perceive not doing (wu wei) as the means to advance.

Not speaking is its philosophy.

Not doing benefits the world.

Heaven below soundlessly reaches for it.

THE COSMIC METHOD

The softest substance hunteth down the hardest; the unsubstantial

penetrateth where there is no opening. Here is the Virtue of Inertia.

Few
are they who attain: whose speech is Silence, whose Work is Inertia.

The softest thing in the world dashes against and overcomes the hardest;that which has no (substantial) existence enters where there is no crevice.I know hereby what advantage belongs to doing nothing (with a purpose).There are few in the world who attain to the teaching without words, andthe advantage arising from non-action.

The softest is stronger than the very hardest

That which makes everything be what it is, penetrates everything

Therefore I know that it's wise to leave and not do anything

That one doesn't need lessons for it

That of all doings, leaving is where true happiness lies

In this world only a few understand this

That which is most yielding eventually overcomes what is most resistant. That which is not becomes that which is. Acting without coercing or being coerced is best.

Guiding by example rather than by words is most successful. Such simple truths are so hard to understand.

What is of all things most yielding

Can overwhelm that which is of all things most hard.

Being substanceless it can enter even where is no space;

That is how I know the value of action that is actionless.

But that there can be teaching without words,

Value in action that is actionless,

Few indeed can understand.

Under heaven, the soft and yielding

overcomes the hard and strong.

That without substance permeates the impenetrable.

Thus, I embrace non-action.

Teach without words.

Work without doing.

Few under heaven understand this.

Nature at its most yielding

Quickly overcomes nature at its most firm

Non-being enters (where) there is no gap

This is how we know (that) inaction

comes to have such advantages

The doctrine which has no words

The benefits of taking no action -

Few in the world attain these

Overcoming the impossible

The softest and most pliable thing in the world

Runs roughshod over the firmest thing in the world.

That which has no substance can enter

Into that which has no spaces or cracks.

I therefore know that there is benefit in taking no action.

The wordless teaching, the benefit of taking no action -

Few in the world can realize these!

The soft overcomes the hard in the world as a gentle rider controls a galloping horse. That without substance can penetrate where there is no space. By these I know the benefit of nonaction.

Teaching without words, working without actions-nothing in the world can compare with them.

Within the realm of Nature,

The gentle horse runs free,

While more intransigent forms stay fixed.

Non-being is able to infiltrate

Where there isn't any room.

Thus I see that unforced action

Is the only path to success,

And that the greatest eloquence is silence.

Action free of noise and expectation:

This is Nature's teaching,

Which but few have truly learned.

Listen to your own true nature,

And learn.

A horse runs without inhibition through a meadow—it doesn't plan its run, plot its course, calculate its own speed, wonder why it runs, or critically compare its gallop with that of others. It doesn't even ask whether running is allowed, or whether it even "feels like" running: there is no self-consciousness in the act. It just runs, because that is its nature, or at least an aspect of it.

This is Lao Tzu's illustration of wu-wei, the principle of unforced action. It is a hackneyed concept, and was particularly disfigured a generation ago (one might say it was "beaten to death") by the "beat generation." Wu-wei is not "non-action" in the sense of passivity, nor is it action that is carelessly or wantonly initiated, and it is certainly not a self-indulgent, "feel-good" type of energy. Wu-wei is action that proceeds from true nature, "without noise or expectation," as the poet observes; it works neither for nor against anything, and it has no fixed cause or goal. It is the energy of the total being in motion, and this is why it seems to penetrate or infiltrate the most dense and obdurate situations and circumstances. Its motion and its liquid ability to penetrate come from its lightness, for it is free of the heavy and rigid accretions of ego.

For people, this is a difficult concept to assimilate into experience, and Lao Tzu understands that: it's one reason that he wrote these 81 poems. He spends much of the Tao Te Ching encouraging us, reminding us that it is possible to learn how to let our formless inner senses and energies activate and transform life on the outer plane of being. It is possible because we already know how; we already are wu-wei. It is merely a matter of unloading the baggage of belief, expectation, display, and all the concretized trappings of ego.

This is the process of growth through diminishment described throughout the book: it is a progressive course of learning that is self-fulfilling because it is, in fact, a process of self-teaching in partnership with the teaching energy of the universe, the Sage. Indeed, there is nothing to learn except the way of diminishment: once we understand that to relieve oneself of ego is to automatically liberate the true self, then we can realize that there is nothing to attain or to cultivate. From this point of understanding, our inner horse is free to run.

The softest will penetrate the hardest.

The non-existent will penetrate the existent.

By this I know the value of being passive.

This
is teaching without words,

achievement without direct action.

In all the world few know this.

The world's weakest drives the world's strongest.

The indiscernible penetrates where there are no crevices.

From this I perceive the advantage of non-action.

Few indeed in the world realize the instruction of the silence, or the benefits of inaction.

The non-existent can enter into the impenetrable.

By this I know that non-action is useful.

Teaching without words, utility without action-

Few in the world have come to this.

Absolute Negation

The most yielding in the social world

gallops over the most firm in the social world.

That which lacks being enters into that which lacks space.

I, with this, know the advantage of lacking deem-acting.

The teaching that is not put in language,

The advantage of lacking deem-acting,

In the social world, these are rarely achieved.

The meekest in the world

Penetrates the strongest in the world.

As nothingness enters into that-which-has-no-opening.

Hence, I am aware of the value of non-action

And of the value of teaching with no words,

As for the value of non-action,

Nothing in the world can match it.

The softest under Heaven can ride roughshod over the hardest.

That without substance can enter even into the smallest space.

That is why I know the benefit of doing nothing.

Teaching without words, benefiting without doing:

there are unfortunately very few people under Heaven who can reach these goals.

The softest under heaven

Gallops over the hardest under heaven;

The formless penetrates into the spaceless.

I thereby know the benefit of nonaction.

The edification of speechlessness

The benefit of nonaction -

Nothing under heaven can match it.

When the learned scholar hears the Tao

He makes every effort to master it.

When the mediocre scholar hears the Tao

It will seem as if he grasps and loses it, alternately.

When the weak scholar hears the Tao

He laughs wildly,

If he had not laughed at it, it would not be worthy to be Tao.

Therefore it is written:

"The enlightened Tao seems dark,

The advanced Tao seems backward,

The direct Tao seems obscure,

The most exalted quality looks like a valley,

The most pristine white looks colorless,

The most superior virtue looks insufficient,

The most solid quality is like a fragile stalk,

The simplest nature looks changeable,

The largest square has no angles,

The largest vessel is never whole,

The loudest sound is hardly heard,

The largest image cannot be imagined.

Tao, since it is hidden, is nameless."

But only the Tao can improve and mend.

To separate is to be constructive; to be constructive is to be destructive.

All things, whether they are constructive or destructive, lead to the One again.

Exterminate learning, and there will no longer be worries.

The
most submissive thing in the world can ride roughshod over the hardest in the
world;

That which is without substance entering that which has no crevices.

That
is why I know the benefit of resorting to no action.

The teaching that uses no words, the benefit of resorting to no action, these
are beyond the understanding of all but a very few in the world.

Its Universal Application

The world's weakest overcomes the world's hardest.

Non-existence enters into the impenetrable.

Thereby I comprehend of non-assertion the advantage. There are few in the world who obtain of non-assertion the advantage and of silence the lesson.

The softest overcomes the hardest, by yielding. Emptiness can enter where there is no space. The value of non-action is in acting naturally. Therefore the master teaches of what is beyond words. And his acts carry no expectations.

The world's tenderest is the master of the world's steeliest.

Null permeates Ull.

I thus know the benefits of laissez-faire.

Instructions without words and benefits of laissez-faire - few things in the world can top them.

The weakest in all beneath heaven gallops through the strongest, and vacant absence slips inside solid presence.

I know by this the value of nothing's own doing.

The teaching without words, the value of nothing's own doing: few indeed master such things.

The softest thing in the world is galloping inside of the hardest;

The invisible substance is entering media having no space.

I therefore learn the benefits of taking no action.

Lessons without words and the value of taking no action,

There are few rivals in the world.

The
most yielding reach of he world

Gallops around the most rigid reach of the world

Absence of presence enters absence of space.

Appropriately
I come to know

There is presence of advantage in the absence of acting.

Telling
without words

Advantage in the absence of acting

The world rarely reaches this.

Always and everywhere it is the soft that wears the hard (as water wears stone). Non-being penetrates even where there are no cracks (as in the most homogeneous bodies such as metal and stone). From that I conclude the supreme effectiveness of non-action.

Silence and inaction - few men come to understand their effectiveness.

The softest things of the world

Override the hardest things of the world

That which has no substance

Enters into that which has no openings

From this I know the benefits of non-attached actions

The teaching without words

The benefits of actions without attachment

Are rarely matched in the world

Our observation of nature shows us that the softest things have power over the hardest things in the world. Consider a horseman riding a powerful, galloping steed. The rider cannot compare to the horse in terms of physical strength, but there is no question who is controlling whom.

Water seeps into and dissolves rocks; electricity flows through a block of metal. This is how the Tao, which lacks substance, can permeate all things - even if they appear to be solid, without any cracks or openings.

I can extrapolate from this to understand life. The Tao acts in a wu wei manner and effortlessly achieves the miracle of life. I, too, can act without attachment in affairs of the world to achieve great benefits effortlessly.

The most effective teaching is conveyed through personal examples rather than preachy words. The most effective results are achieved through acting without any attachments to specific outcomes.

This is the way of the Tao. Its power and effectiveness are unmatched in the world. At the same time, it is also rarely understood by most people.

Notes

Other points to reinforce this concept:

1) When one grows old, the teeth fall out but the tongue remains.

2) The pliant grass survives a fierce storm while the unyielding tree is uprooted.

THE FUNCTION OF THE UNIVERSAL

The most tender things of creation race over the hardest.

A non-material existence enters into the most impenetrable.

I therefore recognize an advantage in the doctrine of not doing (wu wei) and not speaking. But there are few in the world who obtain the advantage of non-assertion (wu wei) and silence.

The softest (chih jou) in the world,

Gallops (ch'ih ch'eng) in the hardest (chih chien) in the world.

That which is not penetrates that which has no crevice (wu yu ju wu chien).

I thereby know the benefit of no-action (wu-wei).

The teaching without words,

The benefit of no-action,

Hardly anything in the world can compare with them.

The softest will penetrate the hardest; the non?existent will penetrate the existent.

By this I know the value of being passive. This is teaching without words; achievement without direct action. In all the world few know this.

The softest thing overcomes the hardest thing.

That which has no substance can enter where there is no space.

This shows the value of non–ado.

Teaching without words; doing without ado: hard to accomplish.

Forty-three

The softest thing in the universe

Overcomes the hardest thing in the universe.

That without substance can enter where there is no room.

Hence I know the value of non-action.

Teaching without words and work without doing

Are understood by very few.

The most supple in the world

Can go through the hardest in the world.

What consists of no substance can enter what has no crevices.

I thus know the benefit of inaction.

Teaching without words,

The benefit of inaction,

Are what few people in the world can perform and obtain.

The softest under Heaven

Rides roughshod over the hardest under Heaven.

The beingless [wu yu] penetrates the spaceless [wu chien].

From this I know the advantage of no-action [wu-wei].

The wordless teaching,

The advantage of no-action -

Nothing under Heaven exemplifies them better.

The world's softest can ride roughshod over the world's hardest.

The pervasive force which has no form (thickness)

Can penetrate through the substance that has no breach (crevice).

Hence, I understand the advantage of non-action.

The principles of teaching without words (speechless tuition) and the benefits of non-action (laissez faire) are peerless under the sun.

Universal Application

Pien Yung

The softest things in the world

Can match and overcome the hardest.

Non-being penetrates even the crackless.

Thus the value of non-interference is clear to me.

The teaching without words,

And the virtue of non-interference,

Can hardly be matched in the world.

The most yielding thing in the world

Masters the hardest thing in the world.

Its nothingness can penetrate even the impenetrable.

That is how I know the value of non-action.

But teaching without the use of words;

And action that is non-action -

How few in the world achieve this!

The softest things beneath heaven

Overcome the hardest.

Nothingness alone penetrates no-space.

Hence I know the use

Of nothing-doing.

The lessons of nothing-speaking,

The use of nothing-doing:

Rare attainments beneath heaven!

The softest of all things can overcome the hardest of all things.

Only the insubstantial can penetrate the spaceless.

Thus, we know the benefit of non-interference and the teaching of the subtle Way of the universe that does not rely on words.

Few people under Heaven can attain it.

XLIII.

All-pervading
Use

The
softest thing, (like water), in the world, will gallop o er,

And
overcome the hardest, as we know,

And
what has non-existence will enter everywhere

Though
there
be
no crevices through which to go.

By
this I know the benefit of non-assertiveness,

The
profit when from acting we refrain,

Silent
teaching! passive doing! alas, there are but few

Under
heaven this advantage to obtain!

In the world when we arrive at gentleness we press forward to overcome all hardness.

To possess Inner Life we enter it by our own private doorway.

We do this in order to know in overflowing fulness the possession of activity of Inner Life.

Overflowing fulness of activity of Inner Life

With power to impart it to others without words -

Few men in the world attain to this.

The softest

of all things

Wears down

the hardest of all things.

Only No thing

can enter into

no-space.

I know the

advantages of

doing everything at

its own speed.

Few things

under heaven

teach as much as the

lessons of Silence,

Or are as

helpful as

the fruits of

proper timing.

The weakest thing in the whole world dashes against the hardest in the whole world. There is in all the world nothing softer or weaker than water, but in attacking the hard and strong, nothing surpasses it. Without substance it penetrates where there is no crevice; by what-is-not this becomes easy.

From this I know that non-action profits.

The doctrine without words and the profit of non-action, few in the world will attain to these.

Therefore the Saint abides by the practice of non-action, and professes the doctrine without words.

The softest thing in the world dashes against and overcomes the

hardest; that which has no (substantial) existence enters where there

is no crevice. I know hereby what advantage belongs to doing nothing

(with a purpose).

There
are few in the world who attain to the teaching without

words, and the advantage arising from non-action.

The subtlest thing under Heaven
gallops triumphantly over the most 'solid.'

The
'dead' have gone to nowhere 'solid.'
Thus I know the advantage of Doing Nothing
Much Personal.
The
Discourse Beyond Personalities-
The advantages of Doing Nothing Much Personal-

few indeed can grasp these!

Overcome
by yielding

The weak can overcome the strong

For only absence can provide

The place where everything belongs

And
thus it is that I can see

The worthiness of not contending

Yet few will ever comprehend

The potency of bending

THE softest of all things

Overrides the hardest of all things.

Only Nothing can enter into no-space.

Hence I know the advantages of Non-Ado.

Few things under heaven are as instructive as the lessons of Silence,

Or as beneficial as the fruits of Non-Ado.

The softest things in the world can with quietude, subtly and perfectly penetrate and wear away the hardest material.

Insubstantial, yielding, it enters where there is no place for entry.

From this one can see and value softness, subtlety, and non-action.

Yet few are the ones who can grasp the concept of teaching without words.

Nor are there many in the world who understand the great gains to be had by non-action.

That which offers no resistance,

overcomes the hardest substances.

That which offers no resistance

can enter where there is no space.

Few
in the world can comprehend

the teaching without words,

or understand the value of non-action.

Gentle interventions, if they are clear, overcome rigid resistances.

If gentleness fails, try yielding or stepping back altogether. When the leader yields, resistances relax.

Generally speaking, the leader's consciousness sheds more light on what is happening than any number of interventions or explanations.

Few leaders realize how much how little will do.

The softest thing in the World

Overcomes the hardest thing in the World.

That which is without substance can enter even where there is no space.

Therefore I know the value of non-action.

Teaching without words

And benefit without actions

There are few in the World who can grasp it.

The
softest manifestation in the Infinite

overcomes the hardest manifestation in the

Infinite.

The
intangible permeates the tangible.

Non-action
incorporates action.

Teaching
by living, working without laboring

is comprehended by only a few.

Under Heaven, the weakest things overcome the strongest.

Non-Being requires no Space.

I know this; that non-action has advantages which it teaches without words.

Seek to attain the benefits of non-action under Heaven.

Under Heaven, it is the softest things which overcome the hardest things.

That which has no substance can penetrate where there is no room.

Thus I know the benefit of non-action.

Few in the world understand the advantage of

Teaching without words and accomplishing without action.

The feeblest is the strongest

That can run everywhere in the world,

It can go through being and non-being alike

Without any effort.

I therefore come to know the good

Of doing nothing willfully.

The efficiency of wordless teaching and doing nothing

Is rarely matched.

The Softest thing in the world rides right over the Hardest things in the world. What-has-No-Being enters what-leaves-no-opening. This makes me realize the advantage of Not Doing.

Teaching done by not talking the advantage gained by Not Doing - few things in the world can match this.

It happens that the weakest defeat the strongest. The reason for this is that Te is present everywhere, pervades everything, and controls everything.

This is why I view non-doing as beneficial.

There is nothing in the world that can compare to the teachings about the inner quietness and the benefit of non-doing!

Seeing how things are, what is easy will overpass the heavy,

That has not come yet will replace that it is now,

Non-action is thus superior to the action.

Very
few in the world can instruct without words,

This is the way of the Wise Person.

The
most pliant things in the world ride roughshod over the hardest. Non-being enters
even where there is no fissure. For this reason I know the benefit of non-action.
Few in the world can attain to [comprehension of] the wordless teaching or to
the benefits of non-activity.

The world's softest thing gallops to and fro through the world's hardest thing.

Things without substance can penetrate things without crevices.

Thus I know the benefit of inaction.

But teaching without words and benefitting without action are understood by few in the entire world.

Subtle Powers

The most yielding parts of the world

Overtake the most rigid parts of the world.

The insubstantial can penetrate continually.

Therefore I know that wihtout action there is advantage.

This philosophy wtihout words,

This advantage wtihout action -

It is rare, in the world, to attain them.

A silent parent can give wisdom unto his child. Without a gesture, the child can understand.

The softest of stuff in the world

Penetrates quickly the hardest;

Insubstantial, it enters

Where no room is.

By
this I know the benefit

Of something done by quiet being;

In all the world but few can know

Accomplishment apart from work,

Instruction when no words are used.

The softest thing under Heaven is able to run in and out of the hardest.

The invisible force is able to penetrate that in which there is no crevice.

Thereby I come to know the advantage of doing nothing.

The instructiveness of not speaking and the benefits of nonaction are incomparable under Heaven.

The softest things under Heaven gallop through the hardest things.

That which has no physical existence can squeeze through where there is no space, so from this I know how advantageous it is to act without conscious purpose.

The teaching that is not expressed in words, the advantage that is had by acting without conscious purpose, rare is it that anyone under Heaven ever reaches them.

1. The softest, most pliable thing in the world runs roughshod over the firmest
things in the world.

2. that which has no substance gets into that which has no spaces or cracks.

3. I therefore know that there is benefit in taking no action.

4. The wordless teaching, the benefit of taking no action—

5. Few in the world can realize these!

The softest
force in the universe

can overcome the hardest of objects.

Something without substance

can pass through the space between atoms.

That's how I
know

about the power of doing nothing.

The silent teachings

and the power of doing nothing

can only be understood

by a few people.

.

The Value of Non-action

The softest things in the world overcome the hardest.

Non-being penetrates even where there is no space.

Through this I know the value of non-action.

Teaching without words and the value of non-action

are understood by few in the world.

Gentleness overcomes rigidity Non-Being penetrates Being In that lies the superiority of non-action.

To persuade without words to win without deeds few in the world succeed.

The Softest Thing

Lao Tze says,

The softest thing in the world dashes against and overwhelms the hardest;

that which is without form can go through where there is no crevice.

Through this I know that acting without the intent to control fate can be advantageous.

The advantage of teaching without speech and acting without the intent to control fate is incomparable in the world.

AT ONE WITH TAO

Only
the soft overcomes the hard,

by yielding, bringing it to peace.

Even where there is no space,

that which has no substance enters in.

Through
these things is shown

the value of the natural way.

The wise man understands full well,

that wordless teaching can take place,

and that actions should occur

without the wish for self-advancement.

The gentlest thing in the world

overcomes the hardest thing in the world.

That which has no substance

enters where there is no space.

This shows the value of non-action.

Teaching without words,

performing without actions:

that is the Master's way.

The world's softest can over-run the world's hardest.

It comes from the unknown (non-existence) and it enters no space.

From this we know how advantageous is non-interference!

Thus, education by non-preaching and the policy of non-interference have merits with which nothing under heaven can compare.

What is softest in the world penetrates what is hardest in the world.

Nonbeing enters where there is no room.

From this I know the riches of nonaction.

Wordless teaching and the riches of nonaction is matched by very little in the world.

XLIII

What
flows cannot be held back by even the hardest wall

What has no form finds every crack and space, and fills it

This is doing without doing, teaching without a text

And the only way to learn to do it

Is to learn not to do anything else

What Is Softest in the World

What is softest in the world

drives what is hardest in the world.

Nonbeing enters where there is no room;

that is how we know noncontrivance enhances.

Unspoken guidance and uncontrived enhancement

are reached by few in the world.

The most flexible wins out over the stiffest.

The shapeless can be omnipresent.

I know it is beneficial not use brute force.

The best in the world teach without preaching, and act without using force.

The softest in the world surpasses the hardest in the world.

Only Nothing can enter into no-space.

Hence, I know the advantages of non-doing.

The teaching of no-word, the beneficial of non-doing, - a very few in the world know.

The softest thing in the universe,

overcomes the hardest thing.

That without substance can enter where there is no room.

Hence I know the value of Wu-Wei.

The benefits, of teaching without words, of Wu-Wei,

are understood by very few.

The most yielding of all things

overcomes the hardest of all things.

That which has no substance

enters where there is no crevice.

Hence,
I know the value of action without striving.

Few
things under heaven bring more benefit than

the lessons learned from silence and

the actions taken without striving.

The
softest

overcomes the hardest.

Having no form to maintain

it can go where there is no space.

Water wears down and splits rock with no intention

this is how I know the value of action that has no motivation.

Yet few people understand the value of

teaching without words

relationship without promise

being without doing

religion without god.

The softest things in the world overcome the hardest things in the world. The
softest substance radiates through the hardest. Also, what's most yielding can
eventually overwhelm the hardest.

Formless penetrates no-crevice; substanceless it can enter where there's no
space; all this could be not-yet-being entering and jostling non-space. That's
how I know the value of action that's actionless. Through this I [also] know
the benefit or advantage of taking no action.

There can be [sad] teaching without words. To teach without words can be best.
Still few can understand such stuff. And there can be solid value in action
that's actionless, or the advantage of taking no action. Yes, the [said] benefit
of taking no action is without compare. Few can understand it.

The softest thing under heaven gallops triumphantly over

The hardest thing under heaven.

Nonbeing penetrates nonspace.

Hence,

I know the advantages of nonaction.

The doctrine without words,

The advantage of nonaction -

few under heaven can realize these!

The gentlest thing in the world will override the strongest.

The Non-Existent pervades everything, though there be no inlet.

By this I comprehend how effectual is non-action.

To teach without words and to be useful without action, few among men are capable of this.

Yielding Maintains a Balance

Be gentle and tender with one another

without being passive.

Passivity leads to resentment

while gentleness gives birth to understanding.

Yield to each other

without surrendering.

Surrendering means the loss of self hood

while yielding maintains the balance

of self and other.

Martial artists know this truth.

A soft flexible body survives

the hardest of attacks

with balance and poise.

A rigid body is easily broken.

Look to your gentleness,

practice your flexibility.

At the same time maintain

your balance and your self hood.

The softest things in the world overcome the hardest things in the
world. Non-being penetrates that in which there is no space. Through
this I know the advantage of taking no action.

Few in the world can understand the teaching without words and the advantage of taking no action.

As the soft
yield of water cleaves obstinate stone,

So to yield with life solves the insoluble:

To yield, I have learned, is to come back again.

But this unworded lesson,

This easy example,

Is lost upon men.

The DAO is the softest thing in the world,

But it can ride freely into the hardest places,

And there is nowhere it cannot go.

I thus know the benefits of WUWEI.

The DAO educates without lecturing, benefits with WUWEI;

There is nothing in the world that can compare with the DAO.

The softest under heaven always prevails over the hardest.

For, having no fixed form,

It can penetrate even where there is no visible opening.

This is the power of balanced action through nonaction.

This is the benefit of balanced action through nonaction.

Nonaction teaches without words, and benefits without actions.

No power in the world can even come close to it.

The feeblest is the strongest

That can run everywhere in the world,

It can go through being and non-being alike

Without any effort.

I therefore come to know the good

Of doing nothing willfully.

The efficiency of wordless teaching and doing nothing

Is rarely matched.

The softest things in the world can with quietude, subtly and perfectly penetrate and wear away the hardest material.

Insubstantial, yielding, it enters where there is no place for entry.

From this one can see and value softness, subtlety, and non-action.

Yet few are the ones who can grasp the concept of teaching without words.

Nor are there many in the world who understand the great gains to be had by non-action.

