===== Chapter 75 =====

The people's starving

Is because of their superior's consumption of too many taxes.

Thus the starvation.

The people's difficulty to govern

Is because of their superior's possessive governing.

Thus the difficulty to govern.

The people's reckless deaths

Are because of their seeking the thickness of life.

Thus the reckless deaths.

Only those who do not use life to contrive

Are indeed skilled at valuing life.

People are hungry. When rulers tax grain People are hungry.

People are rebellious. When rulers are active People are rebellious.

People ignore death. When searching only for life's bounty People ignore
death. Only those who do not strive after life Truly respect life.

Why are the people starving?

Because those above them put heavy taxes on them

And eat up their grain.

That's why the people are starving.

Why are the people difficult to rule?

Because those above them are meddlesome.

That's why the people are difficult to rule.

Why are the people are unconcerned about death?

Because those above them care too much about life.

That's why the people are unconcerned about death.

It is better to disregard life

Than to exalt it too much.

VALUE OF LIVING LIFE

People are starved of body,

When the government taxes to excess.

People are starved of spirit and become unruly,

When the government, by over-control, interferes with the natural rights of mankind.

Being so starved of both body and spirit,

Their leaders demanding so much of living life,

Little remains upon which to live.

People know better than to place too much value upon life.

The people are starving because those who come from above are consuming their tax grain.

Their consumption is the reason for starvation.

The people find this way of ruling difficult because it comes from above.

It is radiance around death that enables you to pursue coming forth.

Generosity is the basis for your radiance around death.

For the reason of not having a reason, the master comes forth in life.

The act of becoming is worthy through the exalted act of coming forth.

THE INJURY OF GREED

In such a state of insecurity it is better to ignore the question of living

than to set store by it.

The people suffer from famine because of the multitude of taxes consumedby their superiors. It is through this that they suffer famine. The peopleare difficult to govern because of the (excessive) agency of their superiors(in governing them). It is through this that they are difficult to govern.The people make light of dying because of the greatness of their laboursin seeking for the means of living. It is this which makes them think lightof dying. Thus it is that to leave the subject of living altogether outof view is better that to set a high value on it.

People starve

Because the wealthy enrich themselves off other people's backs

That's why people starve

People cannot be kept under control

Because their leaders don't know what they're doing

That's why people cannot be kept under control

People want to die

Because they don't want to live this way

Therefore people want to die

Only the one who is not afraid to live,

Is not afraid of dying

Those who make their living by collecting taxes cause the people to starve; when the people starve, the tax collectors, having no one to tax, starve also.

Those who govern people make them discontented with being controlled; and therefore cause them to be uncontrollable.

Those who are so eager to make a better living that they risk death in doing so are the very ones most likely to die. Only the self-sufficient person who depends upon and endangers no one else in order to get his living is most sure to live.

The people starve because those above them eat too much tax-grain.

That is the only reason why they starve.

The people are difficult to keep in order because those above them interfere.

That is the only reason why they are so difficult to keep in order.

The people attach no importance to death,

Because those above them are too grossly absorbed in the pursuit of life.

That is why they attach no importance to death.

And indeed, in that their hearts are so little set on life

They are superior to these who set store by life.

Why are the people starving?

The government takes their grain for taxes.

Therefore they are starving.

Why are the people rebellious?

The government interferes in their lives.

Therefore they are rebellious.

Why do people ignore the gravity of death?

They are consumed by the intensity of life.

Therefore they ignore the gravity of death.

One who is not consumed by life

is better off than one who values it.

The hunger of the people

Is from their superiors eating up so much of their tax grain

This is behind the hunger

The difficulties in governing the people

Are due to their superiors having to take action

This is behind the difficulties in government

The people come to take death lightly

Because they pursue life's riches

This is behind their taking death lightly

Only when one does not think life a performance

Will there be skill in valuing life

Extremis

The reason why people starve,

Is because they take so much in tax-grain.

Therefore the people are starving.

The reason why the common people cannot be ruled,

Is because their superiors have their reasons for acting.

Therefore they cannot be ruled.

The reason why people take death lightly,

Is because they so avidly seek after life.

Therefore the people take death lightly.

Only those who do not act for the purpose of living -

Only those are superior to those who value life.

What makes people go hungry? Rulers eating up all their money in taxes.

What makes people rebellious? Rulers who can't stop interfering.

What makes people take death so lightly? People taking life too seriously. Those who enjoy life are wiser than those who employ life.

People go hungry because taxes eat their food.

Therefore, the people go hungry.

People are hard to manage because they are oppressed.

Therefore, they are hard to manage.

People laugh at death because their lives are cheapened

With the weight of expectation.

This is why they laugh at death.

Who could value life

When food is scarce, and freedom repressed?

The peculiar structure of this verse, with its apparently clumsy redundancy, has been a matter of comment and rationalization by scholars and translators. Perhaps this poem's structure is best explained as a matter of emphasis: Lao Tzu is underscoring the inexorable and appalling connection between taxation and hunger, oppression and rebellion, despair and the cheapening of life. The expression "the people" is not a mere empty ideological abstraction, to be written into constitutions and political speeches, while each unique individual within the nation is forgotten or suppressed. Lao Tzu uses the alliterative language of verse to make a subtle but crucial point: "the people" are real beings, not a collective abstraction, and so when a government represses their natural freedom or robs them of their livelihood, then it has stolen from the treasure of each individual's life and its potential.

Rule Without Interfering

The
people starve

when rulers impose heavy taxes.

That is why people starve.

The
people are rebellious

when rulers meddle in their affairs.

That is why people are rebellious.

The
people do not fear death

when they try to lead a better life.

That is why they do not fear death.

Those
who do not interfere with life

receive genuine value from it.

The people suffer from famine because of the multitude of taxes consumed by their superiors. Because of this they suffer from famine. The people are difficult to govern because of the officiousness of their superiors; because of this they are difficult to govern. Men are continually dying because they lust after life; because of this they frequently die.

It is only those with whom life is no object who truly value life.

The people starve. Because their officials take heavy taxes from them, therefore they starve. The people are hard to rule. Because their officials meddle with affairs, therefore they are hard to rule. The people pay no heed to death. Because they endevour to seek life; therefore they pay no heed to death.

The Destructiveness of Envy

Starvation among the people comes from how much taxes-in-kind those above them
'eat'.

From this: they starve.

The difficulty in governing people comes from those above them taking deeming-action.

From this: they are difficult to govern.

People take death lightly because those above them seek life's richness.

From this they take death lightly.

In general: only those who don't deem-act using 'life' --these are worthies
at valuing life.

When men are deprived of food,

It is because their kings tax them too heavily.

Therefore, they are deprived of food.

When men are hard to govern,

It is because their kings interfere with their lives.

Therefore, they are hard to govern.

When men give up their lives lightly,

It is because their kings are anxious to live extravagantly.

Therefore, men give up their lives lightly.

Only one who disregards his own life

Knows how to value the lives of others.

The people are hungry.

It is because those who govern them consume too much in taxes.

That is why the people are hungry.

The people are hard to govern.

It is because those who govern them interfere too much.

That is why the people are hard to govern.

The people scorn death.

It is because they seek dearly for life.

That is why people treat death with disdain.

Only he who does not seek dearly for his life can value life worthily.

The people are starving,

Because he takes too much grain tax,

Hence, they are starving.

The hundred family names are unruly,

Because their sovereign has the intention to act,

Hence, they are unruly.

The people take death lightly,

Because he seeks after extravagant living,

Hence, they take death lightly.

Only one who does not apply himself to living

Is worthier than those who exalt living.

The people are starving,

Because their clerks impose heavy taxes on them.

That is why they are starving.

It is difficult to govern the people,

Because their clerks interfere in their affairs.

That is why they are difficult to govern.

The people do not respect death,

Because their clerks direct them to seek life.

That is why they do not respect death.

The people are hungry:

It is because those in authority eat up too much in taxes

That the people are hungry.

The people are difficult to govern.

It is because those in authority are too fond of action

That the people are difficult to govern.

The people treat death lightly:

It is because the people set too much store by life

That they treat death lightly.

It
is just because one has no use for life that one is wiser than the man who values
life.

Harmed Through Greed

The people hunger because their superiors consume too many taxes; therefore they hunger. The people are difficult to govern because their superiors are too meddlesome; therefore they are difficult to govern. The people make light of death on account of the intensity of their clinging to life; therefore they make light of death.

He who is not bent on life is worthier than he who esteems life.

If you require many concessions from children, they won't be able to fulfil their own hearts. Give them many rules to follow and they will rebel. When people outwardly value life, death is taken lightly. If death is taken lightly, life will easily be sacrificed.

Starvation in the populace is caused by excessive taxes.

Excessive taxes result in starvation.

Difficulty in governing the populace is caused by a governor's interferences.

Interferences result in difficulties in governance.

Indifference to death in the populace is caused by a governor's overindulgence.

A governor's overindulgence results in the populace's indifference to death.

One who does not overindulgence is wiser than one who overvalues one's life.

The people are starving,

and it's only because you leaders feast on taxes

that they're starving.

The people are impossible to rule,

and it's only because you leaders are masters of extenuation

that they're impossible to rule.

The people take death lightly,

and it's only because you leaders crave life's lavish pleasures

that they take death lightly,

they who act without concern for life: it's a wisdom far beyond treasuring life.

The people are hungry, because

Their ruler consumes too much of their tax grains.

That is why they are hungry.

The people become difficult to govern, because

Their ruler takes willful actions,

That is why they are difficult to govern.

The people take death lightly, because

Their ruler demands too much for his luxurious life.

That is why they take death lightly.

Only he who does not overvalue his own life excels in valuing life.

The
hunger of people

It happens that those above feed by taxing abundantly

Appropriately hunger happens.

The
difficulty in governing people

It happens that those above possess action

Appropriately the difficulty in governing happens.

The
lightness of people at death

It happens that those above reach for the thickness of life

Appropriately lightness at death happens.

In
the end only those who are absent of acting to live

Are appropriately wise in relating to treasuring life.

If the people are hungry, it is because the prince eats up excessive sums of money (which he extorts from them).

If the people are restive, it is because the prince does too much, (indisposes them by his innovations).

If the people expose themselves lightly to death (in hazardous enterprises), it is because he loves life too much, (love of well-being, of pleasure, of fame). He who does nothing in order to live, is wiser than he who harms himself in order to live.

The people's hunger

Is due to the excess of their ruler's taxation

So they starve

The people's difficulty in being governed

Is due to the meddling of their ruler

So they are difficult to govern

The people's disregard for death

Is due to the glut in their ruler's pursuit of life

So they disregard death

Therefore those who do not strive for living

Are better than those who value living

When people are hungry - when their basic survival needs are in question - it is because the ruler overzealously imposes ever increasing taxes, leaving very little for them to sustain themselves. As a result, the people starve.

When people are difficult to control - when they are openly rebellious and refuse to obey orders - it is because the ruler constantly meddles in their livelihood with more and more restrictive rules. In reaction, the people become defiant against authority.

When people disregard death - when they no longer care if they live or die - it is because the ruler pursues an extravagant lifestyle, indulging in ever more luxuries while the people suffer hardship. Seeing this, the people brave death to rise against the ruler.

Therefore, we can see from the above that a ruler who does not obsessively focus on "the good life" would be much better than the ruler who values the mindless pursuit of luxurious living.

Under such a wise ruler, the people do not starve (their basic needs are met), they are not difficult to govern (they gladly follow wise leadership), and they have no reckless disregard for death (their own lives are worth living).

Notes

The last two lines in this chapter are particularly difficult to translate, and they can be difficult to understand even when translated correctly. It helps to keep in mind that every line in this chapter expresses one consistent concept. Once you grasp the concept, everything should fall neatly into place.

Once again, we see that what appears to be advice for the emperor is in fact the Tao of better living for all of us.

The overall theme in this chapter is about how we deal with the material world. It points out that the excessive pursuit and indulgence in materialistic things will end up costing us in various ways.

Oftentimes we overtax ourselves when we overindulge. The bloated feeling after eating too much at the buffet, and the hangover after drinking too much at a wild party - are both examples.

When we overtax ourselves, we can neglect our basic spiritual needs. Overextended and mentally exhausted, we tend to overlook the need to feed the soul with uplifting and inspirational sustenance.

When we stray from the simplicity of wu wei and meddle in everything around us, life becomes more and more difficult to manage. Our excessive interference results in unintended side effects and makes things more complicated.

For instance, if we meddle in the affairs of friends, we often end up alienating them. They do not appreciate our interference, so the relationship becomes strained and increasingly distant.

This chapter also tells us that when the mind is overly greedy in pursuing materialistic indulgences, the spirit suffers. Life becomes an endless series of sensory stimulations, devoid of meaning and purpose. It no longer seems worthwhile, thus causing one to question: Why bother? Why go on living? Why not just end it all?

To see vivid examples of this, we only have to turn our attention to celebrity suicides. These are people who seem to have it all materially, and yet are impoverished spiritually. They see little point in life, and no reason to live - in other words, they feel a complete disregard for death.

LOSS BY GREEDINESS

Starvation of a people comes when an official appropriates to himself too much of the taxes. The reason a people are difficult to govern is because the officials are too meddlesome; the people make light of death because they are so absorbed in life's interests. The one who is not absorbed in life is more moral than he who esteems life.

People are hungry.

Because their rulers levy too much grain tax,

Therefore they are hungry.

People are hard to rule.

Because their rulers rule by action (wei),

Therefore they are hard to rule.

People take death lightly.

Because they are in thick pursuit of life,

Therefore they take death lightly.

One who has nothing to pursue in life,

Is wiser than one who values life.

Rule Without Interfering

The people starve when rulers impose heavy taxes. That is why people starve.

The people are rebellious when rulers meddle in their affairs. That is why people are rebellious.

The people do not fear death when they fight for a better life. That is why they do not fear death.

Those who do not interfere with life receive genuine value from it.

When taxes are too high, people starve.

When the government is too intrusive,

it makes life no longer worth living, and

the people lose their love of life and their fear of death.

To promote the value of life, do not interfere with it.

Seventy-five

Why are the people starving?

Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes.

Therefore the people are starving.

Why are the people rebellious?

Because the rulers interfere too much.

Therefore they are rebellious.

Why
do the people think so little of death?

Because the rulers demand too much of life.

Therefore the people take death lightly.

Having
little to live on, one knows better than to value life too much.

The hunger on the part of the people

Is the result of exorbitant taxes on the part of the ruler;

Thus the people are hungry.

The unruliness on the part of the people

Is the result of meddlesome actions on the part of the ruler;

Thus the people are unruly.

Making light of life on the part of the people

Is the result of setting too much store by life on the part of the ruler;

Thus the people make light of life.

Those who make light of their own life

Are wiser than those who overvalue their life.

The people starve

Because the ruler consumes too much tax-grain.

Because of this they starve.

The people are hard to govern

Because the ruler rules through action [yu wei].

Because of this they are hard to govern.

The people take their death lightly

Because the ruler hoards his life.

Because of this they take their death lightly.

Truly, one who does nothing with life

Is wiser than one who prizes [the value of] life.

People are starving because they are forced to pay onerous taxes.

That is why they are starving.

People are unruly because they are burdened by excessive rules.

This is why they become unruly.

Whilst living lavishly, the ruler extorts heavy taxes from the people, forcing them to risk their lives simply to eke out a living.

That is why the people are not afraid to die.

Hence, frugal rulers are infinitely better than those harsh ones who extort heavy taxes to live luxuriously.

The Harm of Greed

T'an Sun

The reason why the people are starving

Is that the officials "eat their taxes" too much.

That's why the people are starving.

The reason why the people are difficult to rule

Is that the authorities resort to interference.

That's why the people are difficult to rule.

The reason why the people make light of death

Is that they are too eager for high living.

That's why the people make light of death.

Those who have nothing to make life pleasurable

Are worthier than those who value high living.

If the people go hungry it is because their betters ruin them with taxes:

That is why they must grow hungry.

IF the people are hard to govern it is because their betters meddle in their affairs:

That is the only reason why they are hard to overn.

If the peoplemake light of death it is because they are so absorbed in the task of living:

That is why they make light of death.

And indeed they who set too little store by life are at any rate wiser than they who value it too dearly.

When people are starving,

Their rulers are taxing them heavily.

That is why they are starving.

When people are hard to govern,

Their rulers are something-doing.

That is why they are hard to govern.

When people make light of death,

Their rulers make much of life.

That is why they make light of death.

Not interfering with life

Is better than glamorizing life.

Why are people starving and leading a difficult life?

Is it not because their rulers consume too much tax grain?

Is that why they are starving and leading a difficult life?

Why are people hard to manage?

Is it not because those above them create distress with their oppressive interference?

Is that why they are hard to manage?

Why do people make light of death?

Is it not because those above them demand too much for themselves and value only their own personal power and glory?

Is that why they take death so lightly?

One who is a guardian of people and does nothing for his own life knows how to value all lives well.

LXXV.

Injury
from Covetousness

The
taxes eaten by the ruling class

Left nothing to be eaten by the mass,

And
that is why through famine they must pass.

The
ruling class made such a great ado

In ruling
men, that these made trouble, too,

nd
that is why their difficulties grew.

People
make light of death in their turmoil,

And,
seeking life s excess, thereby beguile

Themselves
till death, made light of, claims his spoil.

On
life to set less store is therefore best,

It
thus becomes a far more worthy quest

Than
when tis made one s ruling interest.

The people are hungry.

Because they who are over the food tax it heavily

That is why the people are hungry.

The people are difficult to govern.

Because the rulers trust in possessions and activities

That is why the people are difficult to govern.

The people make light of death.

Because they work hard in order to save their life,

That is why they make light of death.

A Master indeed is he whose life-activities are from within.

He excels all man in his application of Life.

Why are

the people starving?

Because those above them

are taxing them too much.

That is why

they are starving.

Why are

the people hard to manage?

Because those above them

are troublesome and selfish.

That is why

they are hard to manage.

Why do

the people make jokes about death?

Because those above them

make too much of life.

That is why

they make jokes about death.

The people

have nothing to live on!

They know better

than to value such a life!

If the people starve, it is because of the quantity of taxes consumed by their superiors. That is why they starve.

If the people are hard to govern, it is because of the interference of their superiors. That is why they are hard to govern.

If the people think lightly of death, it is because of the excessive manner in which they seek to obtain life. That is why they think lightly of death.

Truly, not acting for life's sake is wiser than valuing life.

The people suffer from famine because of the multitude of taxes

consumed by their superiors. It is through this that they suffer

famine.

The
people are difficult to govern because of the (excessive)

agency of their superiors (in governing them). It is through this

that they are difficult to govern.

The
people make light of dying because of the greatness of their

labours in seeking for the means of living. It is this which makes

them think light of dying. Thus it is that to leave the subject of

living altogether out of view is better than to set a high value on

it.

Human
hunger
is the result of governmental profiteering.
Because of THAT,
there is hunger.
The
common people are not 'governable'
because of their 'superiors' own behavior.

Because of THAT, they are not governable.
The
people are 'entertained' by death
because of too much emphasis on preserving
their lives.
Because of THAT, death is their 'entertainment.'
Now,
only Great Benevolence who acts not for the sake of outer life
is wiser than
those who value their own skin very highly.

The
people starve when taxes take

The bulk of what they earn

When leaders interfere too much

They get rebellion in return

The
people do not fear to die

If leaders rob them of their lives

But taking no more than you need

You see that everybody thrives

WHY are the people starving?

Because those above them are taxing them too heavily.

That is why they are starving.

Why are the people hard to manage?

Because those above them are fussy and have private ends to serve.

That is why they are hard to manage.

Why do the people make light of death?

Because those above them make too much of life.

That is why they make light of death.

The people have simply nothing to live upon!

They know better than to value such a life!

When the nation is in want of food, it can be seen that the government officials are eating too much of the grain in excessive taxes.

And why are the people restive and hard to govern?

They are in a state of near rebellion due to the intrusive machinations of the government.

The people learn to make light of death when they strive to obtain goods and extravagant items.

They are relentlessly working to acquire more, and look to death as a release from pursuit of material gain.

In this wise it is easy to not place too high a price on life.

When people go hungry,

the government's taxes are too high.

When people become rebellious,

the government has become too intrusive.

When
people begin to view death lightly,

wealthy people have too much

which causes others to starve.

Only
those who do not cling to their life can save it.

The group will not prosper if the leader grabs the lion's share of the credit for the good work that has been done.

The group will rebel and resist if the leader relies on strict controls in an effort to make things come out a certain way.

The group members will become deadened and unresponsive if the leader is critical and harsh.

The wise leader is not greedy, selfish, defensive, or demanding. That is why the leader can be trusted to allow any event to unfold naturally.

The people are starving because their leaders eat up

All their money in taxes.

And so, they are hungry.

The people are rebellious

Because their leaders are intrusive.

And so, they protest.

The people make light of death because their leaders

live so well at their expense.

And so, they expect death.

Therefore, it seems that one who does not grasp this life

too tightly is better off than one who clings.

When
the people of a nation are starving

and without the basic necessities,

it is because taxes are excessive.

When
the people of a nation are rebellious,

it is because the laws are out of

harmony with the population.

When
the leaders of a nation are oppressive

in their confusion,

the people remember their oneness

and become indifferent to death.

Those
who remember the oneness of Infinity

are indifferent to life and death

and consequently live in peace

and harmony.

People are starving,

because their leaders consume too much in taxes;

that is why they are starving.

People are difficult to govern,

because of what their leaders do;

that is why they are difficult to govern.

People treat Death lightly,

because the demands of Life are so great;

that is why they treat Death lightly.

Meanwhile, those who do nothing to support themselves

are more esteemed than honorable lives.

If the people go hungry

It is because the rulers take too much in taxes.

This is why they go hungry.

If the people prove difficult to rule

It is because the rulers interfere too much.1

This is why they prove difficult to rule.

If the people take death too lightly

It is because they are engrossed in seeking life's pleasures.

This is why the people take death too lightly.

It is only by ceasing to seek after life's pleasures that one will find life pleasurable.

1. i.e. they are trying to do too many things, and are not following the Taoist way of non-action.

People are hungry because "the Above" tax too much.

People are disobedient because "the Above" do too much.

People would rather die because "the Above" live too high.

Therefore, one who does nothing to benefit one's own life

Is good at keeping and supporting lives.

'The people are starving.' It is because those high up eat too much tax grain, this is why they are starving.

'The people are hard to govern.' It is because there is Working among those high up, this is why they are hard to govern.

'The people take death lightly.' It is because they pursue a lavish life, this is why they take death lightly. Simply: Those who do not Work at 'living' - these are better men than those who 'love life.'

Looking at the majority of people, one may think that they are constantly hungry. They are constantly concerned about accumulation and multiplication of their supplies. They cannot stop in this activity!

In all affairs, they aspire only to personal profit — by any means!

They do not to understand the principles of life suggested by Tao — about loving others and caring about them, about non-doing.

They live not looking at Tao, ignoring Tao, wasting their life power for doing things which have no true value. They have too strong "love for life", and therefore they die too early.

Yet he who neglects his earthly life for the sake of everyone's good increases its value before Tao.

When leaders become greedy there will be famine.

When leaders follow only the self-interest, people become unruly.

When leaders do kill without a good reason,

People will revolt without fear of death.

The
reason that the people starve is that their superiors consume so much tax grain.
For this reason do they starve. The reason the people are difficult to govern
is that their superiors are officious. For this reason are they difficult to
govern. The reason the people view death lightly is that their superiors seek
to augment the richness of life. For this reason do they view death lightly.
Now only those who do not do things to augment life are good at valuing life.

The people are starving

Because the man on top devours too much tax money.

So they are starving.

The people are hard to govern

Because the man on top is too active in governing.

So they are hard to govern.

The people think little of death

Because the man on top strives for a rich life.

So they think little of death.

Therefore it is better to do nothing for one's life

Than to value it.

Self-Destructive Leadership

People are hungry.

Because those above consume too much in taxes,

People are hungry.

People are difficult to lead.

Because those above interfere with them,

People are difficult to lead.

People make light of death.

Because those above deeply seek survival,

People make light of death.

Indeed, it is those who do not interfere with life

Who are capable of respecting life.

Do away with rules of the home. The family will fall into harmony and there will be no struggle lead by not leading.

The people starve because of those

Above them, who consume by tax

In grain and kind more than their right.

For this, the people are in want.

The
people are so hard to rule

Because of those who are above them,

Whose interference makes distress.

For this, they are so hard to rule.

The
people do not fear to die;

They too demand to live secure:

For this, they do not fear to die.

So they, without the means to live,

In virtue rise above those men

Who value life above its worth.

The people suffer from famine because too many of the taxes are swallowed by their rulers.

Thus they suffer from famine.

The people are difficult to rule because their rulers are fond of taking action.

Thus they are difficult to rule.

The people take risks with their lives because the rulers take good care of their own lives.

Thus the people are forced to risk their lives.

Those who do not value their lives are wiser than those who overvalue their lives.

The reason the common folk starve is that the ruler eats too much grain tax.

This is why they starve.

The reason the common folk are hard to govern is that the ruler takes deliberate actions [you-wei].

This is why they are hard to govern.

The reason the common folk take death lightly is that they place too much emphasis on life.

This is why they take death lightly.

It is only by acting without regard for life that one becomes more of a worthy than one who values life.

1. The reason why people starve,

2. Is because they take so much in tax-grain.

3. Therefore they starve.

4. The reason why the common people cannot be ruled,

5. Is because their superiors have their reason for acting.

6. Therefore they cannot be ruled.

7.
The reason why people take death lightly,

8. Is because they so avidly seek after life.

9. Therefore they take death lightly.

10. Only those who do not act for the purpose of living—

11. Only these are superior to those who value life.

People starve

because the government

taxes them to death.

People rebel

because the government

tries to run their lives.

People act like life is meaningless

because the government

takes everything they have.

People who know
how to enjoy life

are wiser than people who value their lives.

Valuing Life

People are hungry,

because rulers eat too much tax-grain.

That is why people are starving.

People are hard to govern,

because rulers interfere too much.

That is why they are hard to govern.

People do not care about death,

because rulers demand too much of life.

That is why they do not care about death.

Only those who do not interfere with living

are best at valuing life.

The people are worn out and wasting away because the authorities use and consume too much.

Therefore the misery of the people.

The people are undisciplined and unruly because the authorities are disciplining and ruling too much.

Therefore the unruliness of the people.

The people take death lightly because the authorities make life hard for them.

Therefore the indifference of the people.

He will guide more wisely and easily who orders and administers less letting the inner order of life prevail.

On Valuing Life

Lao Tze says,

The people suffer from hunger because their superior agencies have imposed a heavy tax, thus they are hungry.

The people are difficult to govern because their superior agencies are too fond of meddling, thus they are difficult to govern.

The people make lightly of dying because of the excessive costs in seeking the means of living, thus they think lightly of dying.

Therefore the benevolent should be those who do not interfere with people's living;

instead of those who value people's living.

INJURING THROUGH GREED

When
taxes are too heavy,

hunger lays the people low.

When those who govern interfere too much,

the people become rebellious.

When
those who govern demand too much

of people's lives, death is taken lightly.

When the people are starving in the land,

life is of little value,

and so is more easily sacrificed by them

in overthrowing government.

When taxes are too high,

people go hungry.

When the government is too intrusive,

people lose their spirit.

Act for the people's benefit.

Trust them; leave them alone.

The hunger of people is caused by the ruler who levies too many taxes.

Thus they are hungry.

The difficulty of ruling people is due to the fact that the ruler interferes.

Thus they are difficult to rule.

The reason people take life lightly is because they live by overdrawing their lives heavily.

Therefore, they take life lightly.

Hence, only the one who has not overdone his living knows his life better.

The reason people are starving is because the government taxes too much.

This is the reason for starvation.

The reason people are hard to govern is because their leaders are actively engaged.

This is why they are hard to govern.

The reason people are not serious about death is because they seek the burdens of life.

This is why they are not serious about death.

Only those who are not slaves to life are wise to the value of life.

LXXV

The
more the leader fills his coffers, the more people go hungry

The more he rules on this or that, the more people are discontent

People
who avidly seek to experience life take death lightly

Those who do not try to live life to its fullest are truly alive

People's Starvation

When people are starving,

it is because their governments take too much,

causing them to starve.

When people are hard to control,

it is because of the contrivances of their governments,

which make them hard to control.

When people slight death,

it is because of the earnestness

with which they seek life;

that makes them slight death.

Only those who do not contrive to live

are wise in valuing life.

People starve because they pay heavy taxes.

People are hard to govern because the rulers force their wishes on people.

People are not afraid to rebel, because the rulers live extravagantly.

Therefore those who avoid extravagant life-style are wiser than those who live extravagantly.

The people are starving.

It is because those above them are taxing them too heavily.

That is why they are starving.

The people are hard to govern.

It is because those above them have a lot of interference.

That is why they are hard to govern.

The people make light of death.

It is because those above them live an extravagant life.

That is why they make light of death.

Only he who works not for life knows to value life.

Why are the people starving?

Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes.

Therefore, the difficulty of governing starving people is,

caused by the rules' own doing.

Therefore, they are rebellious.

Why are the people not afraid of death?

Because the rulers demand too much for their comfort.

And people take death lightly.

Only those rulers who live on little, are good for people.

Why are the people starving?

Because their leaders eat up too much of the tax-grain;

that is why the people are starving.

Why are thc people difficult to govern?

Because their leaders interfere;

that is why the people are difficult to govern.

Why do the people treat death lightly.

Because their leaders are so grossly absorbed

in the pursuit of living;

that is why the people treat death lightly.

Indeed,
it is wiser to ignore life altogether

than to place too high a value on it.

People
starve because

governments and religions and businesses spend

too much money

elsewhere.

That is the only reason there is hunger.

People demonstrate and rebel because

religions and businesses and governments make laws

to restrict them.

That is the only reason there isn't peace.

People
have no fear of death because

businesses and governments and religions are

so busy trying

to survive.

That is why death carries so little fear for common people,

for having so little to get out of life themselves,

their lives are fuller.

People are hungry because rulers eat too much income, too much tax-grain. Therefore
they starve, but also because of bad interference from those above. Some turn
hard to rule as their rulers do too many things. That's why they're hard to
keep in order.

If so, the people are not very afraid of death, as they're anxious to make a
living. That's why they take death lightly in such cases.

So:
Those who interfere not with their living that are wise in exalting life. Maybe
he who seeks only little after life can excel in making life valuable. But all
that have hearts set only little on life could be superior to those who set
store by life.

Human hunger is the result of overtaxation.

For this reason,

There is hunger.

The common people are not governable because of their superiors' actions.

For this reason,

They are not governable.

The people make light of death because of too much emphasis on the quest for life.

For this reason,

They make light of death.

Now,

Only she who acts not for the sake of life

Is wiser than those who value life highly.

The people suffer from famine on account of the heavy taxation put upon them.

This is the cause of their need.

The people are difficult to govern because of the overbearing of their superiors.

This is the cause of their trouble.

The people make light of dying because of the great hardships of trying to live.

This is the reason for their indifference to death.

Therefore to keep living in obscurity is better than making overmuch of it.

Why Else Are You Together?

When expectations become numerous,

pressure grows within a relationship.

When pressure grows

it becomes explosive.

You did not come together to be molded

by each other's expectations.

You are together to celebrate and enjoy

the absolute wonder of each other,

to warm your nights and brighten your days,

and to delight in each other's differences.

Pressure can be applied in many ways—

stony silence and withdrawal until the other apologizes,

criticism until they learn,

withholding or giving sexual pleasure

depending on their behavior.

This is no way to live.

Let go of expectations, release the pressure,

and enjoy each other.

Why else are you together?

The people starve because the ruler eats too much tax-grain. Therefore they starve.

They are difficult to rule because their ruler does too many things. Therefore they are difficult to rule.

The people take death lightly because their ruler strives for life too
vigorously. Therefore they take death lightly. It is only those who do
not seek after life that excel in making life valuable.

Death is no
threat to people

Who are not afraid to die;

But even if these offenders feared death all day,

Who should be rash enough

To act as executioner?

Nature is executioner.

When man usurps the place,

A carpenter's apprentice takes the place of the master:

And 'an apprentice hacking with the master's axe

May slice his own hand.'

The people are hungry because the ruler taxes them too heavily, so they are hungry.

The people are difficult to control because the ruler is doing too many useless things, so they are difficult to control.

The people are not afraid of death because the ruler enjoys himself too much, so they are not afraid of death.

The ruler who does not care for his life is superior to the ruler who enjoys his life.

Why are the people starving?

Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes.

That is why.

Why are the people difficult to govern?

Because the rulers interfere too much.

That is why.

Why do the people think so little of death?

Because the rulers think too much of their own life.

That is why.

Those who do not overvalue their life are wiser than those who do.

People are hungry because "the Above" tax too much.

People are disobedient because "the Above" do too much.

People would rather die because "the Above" live too high.

Therefore, one who does nothing to benefit one's own life

Is good at keeping and supporting lives.

When the nation is in want of food,

it can be seen that the government officials are eating too much of the grain in excessive taxes.

And why are the people restive and hard to govern?

They are in a state of near rebellion due to the intrusive machinations of the government.

The people learn to make light of death when they strive to obtain goods and extravagant items.

They are relentlessly working to acquire more, and look to death as a release from pursuit of material gain.

In this wise it is easy to not place too high a price on life.

