===== Chapter 79 =====

[After] pacifying great hatred

Surely there exists remaining resentment.

How can [this] be considered good?

Therefore, the sages keep the left side [of an] agreement

And do not demand [the right side] from people.

Having virtue, [one] manages an agreement.

Lacking virtue, [one] manages to deprive.

The Heavenly Tao is not personal.

[It] always give[s] kindly to people.

Appears great hatred sand hatred will remain. How can this be good?

Therefore the Sage Holds the tally But does not judge people.

Those who have Te Control the tally. Those who lack Te Collect their due.

Heaven has no favourites But endures in good people.

When great enemies settle their quarrel

Some of their enmity will linger on.

Is there a way to set things right?

The sage abides by the agreement

And does not seek to assign blame.

People of virtue meet their obligations.

Those without virtue exact their claims.

The Tao of heaven does not take sides.

Yet it always stays with the good.

OF OBLIGATIONS AND CLAIMS

At the conclusion of a serious dispute,

It is rare that some resentment not remain behind.

To restore harmony, the Sage,

Keeping to the letter of the agreement with regard to his own obligations,

Never compels the other to fulfill his responsibilities.

Having Te, one would attend to obligations.

Without Te, one would press claims.

While it is the nature of Tao to be free of partiality,

Holding to the essence of the Tao,

The truly virtuous find the Tao abiding within.

If you agree with great hatred surely there will be a surplus of hatred.

How are you then able to act with virtue?

The sage holds the left side of the contract* and does not make claims on the people.

They have the action of the soul which takes charge of their contract.

Without the action of the soul the contract would be unfulfilled.

The heaven's Tao is not personal.

It is eternally on the side of the person's goodness.

* The left side was the position below or the position of debtor.

TRUTH IN COVENANT

When enemies are reconciled, there is always an aftermath of illwill.

How can this be useful?

Therefore,
the Wise Man, while he keepeth his part of the record of a

transaction, doth not insist on its prompt execution. He who hath the

Teh considereth the situation from all sides, while he who hath it not

seeketh only to benefit himself.

In
the Tao of Heaven, there is no distinction of persons in its love; but

it is for the True Man to claim it.

When a reconciliation is effected (between two parties) after a greatanimosity, there is sure to be a grudge remaining (in the mind of the onewho was wrong). And how can this be beneficial (to the other)? Therefore(to guard against this), the sage keeps the left-hand portion of the recordof the engagement, and does not insist on the (speedy) fulfillment of itby the other party. (So), he who has the attributes (of the Tao) regards(only) the conditions of the engagement, while he who has not those attributesregards only the conditions favourable to himself. In the Way of Heaven,there is no partiality of love; it is always on the side of the good man.

When people make peace after violent hostility

Then it's an armed peace

How can it be right?

One who is wise only takes a look at his own share in the conflict

And never blames his opponent

So one who is fair only faces his own part

While one who is not daring enough to look at oneself, blames the other

The road to self-knowledge knows no partiality

But it does benefit the sincere

Make agreements and then quarrelling when they are broken is never advisable. For even when a quarrel is patched up, some animosity will remain. How can this be considered good?

Therefore the intelligent man continues to carry out his side of a bargain Even though he does not demand of others that they fulfill their promises

The righteous insist on keeping agreements to the letter, And the indiscreet foolishly neglect or break their agreements;

But Nature neither keeps nor breaks contracts (because it makes none). And its ways are good for men.

(To requite injuries with good deeds.)

To allay the main discontent,

But only in a manner that will certainly produce further discontents can hardly be called successful.

Therefore the Sage behaves like the holder of the left-hand tally,

Who stays where he is and does not go round making claims on people.

For he who has the "power" of Tao is the Grand Almoner;

He who has not the "power" is the Grand Perquisitor.

"It is Heaven's way, without distinction of persons,

To keep the good perpetually supplied."

When bitter quarrels are settled,

enmity is sure to remain.

What can be done?

A man of virtue pays his debts

but does not exact his due.

He fulfills his obligations

but makes no demands.

The Tao of heaven plays no favorites.

It flows with Virtue.

(When) reconciling a great grievance

There will surely be lingering resentments

(And) how can this be regarded as good?

This is why wise ones will post the greater bond

And will not press upon others

To have character is to look after obligations

To lack character is to look for entitlements

Heaven's way has no favorites

But usually sides with the right person

Reconciliation

To make peace where there has been great resentment,

There is bound to be resentment left over.

How could this be regarded as good?

Therefore the Sage holds The right tally

Yet makes no demands of others.

For this reason, those who have virtue

are in charge of the tally;

Those without Virtue are in charge of the taxes.

The Tao of Heaven is impartial

It stays always with the good men.

In the reconciling of resentments, ill will often lingers. What's the good in that?

The person who is truly good concerns herself always with what she owes others, never with what they owe her.

The Tao of heaven is impartial. If you perpetuate it, it perpetuates you.

A great conflict, even when resolved,

Leaves behind a bitter taste.

How can the residue of enmity be cleansed?

The teaching of the Sage is this:

Hold not to your claim, but to your contract.

Abandon entitlement and accept obligation.

Trust in the virtues of the Cosmic Way:

Disperse guilt and depart from blame.

The Tao plays no favorites,

But calls upon the inner truth of all.

Settling Disputes

Settling
a great dispute leaves some hatred behind.

Can this be good?

Therefore
the truly wise defend the weak

and do not seek vengeance.

The
man with Teh fosters reconciliation;

the man without Teh fosters reaction.

And
so it is truly said:

While Tao is impartial, it permeates good men.

To compromise a great hate leaves ill-will behind; that is only a bleeding which produces tranquility.

Therefore the Holy Man does not pry into other people's affairs, even when he holds the left-hand bond, possessing the attributes of the Tao, he quietly holds his own; he who lacks the qualities of Tao strives to put everybody right.

It is heaven's way to be without favourites, and to be always on the side of the good man.

Return love for great hatred.

Otherwise, when a great hatred is reconciled, some of it will surely remain.

How can this end in goodness?

Therefore the Sage holds to the left half of an agreement, but does not exact what the other holder ought to do.

The virtuous resort to agreement.

The virtueless resort to exaction.

The Tao of heaven shows no partiality;

It abides always with good men.

Recognizing Agreements

Settling a massive resentment

Necessarily some resentment will be left-over.

How can such be deemed as worth?

Using this: Sages grasp the left side of the agreement.

And don't demand from others.

Have virtuosity in supervising agreements.

Lack virtuosity in supervising taxation.

The natural guide has no kin.

It constants being with worthy people.

When a serious resentment is reconciled,

Some resentment certainly remains.

Thus, reconciliation cannot be considered the best way.

Although the wise holds to the contract prepared by the debtor,

He never forces the debtor to fulfill his responsibility.

Therefore, the man of Tê holds only to the contract,

While the man without Tê presses for taxes.

The way of nature is free from intimacy.

Yet it constantly stays with the good man.

When peace is made between two great rivals,

some resentment will surely remain.

How can this be considered a good deed?

That is why the sage keeps his half of the agreement,

but does not require the debt from the other party.

That is how a man with virtue takes charge of the agreement.

But a man without virtue requires the other to fulfil his obligation,

like a wheel running in a rut.

The Tao of Heaven shows no favouritism: it is always on the side of good men.

In pacifying a great enmity,

There must be some remnant enmity.

How could that be considered good?

Hence, the sage man

Held the left half of the deed

Without demanding payment from the people.

Therefore, those who possess virtue administer deeds;

Those who possess no virtue administer tithing.

Heaven's Tao is unbiased;

It always supports good men.

Give love in return for fierce hatred.

Otherwise, when the fierce hatred is forgotten,

A little of it will still remain.

And how can this end well?

Therefore the sage keeps the left half of a contract,

And does not check what the other holder has to do.

The virtuous person acts according to the contract,

The person who is not virtuous resorts to lawsuits and disputations.

"The superior Tao is not biased,

It always accompanies the virtuous person."

When peace is made between great enemies,

Some enmity is bound to remain undispelled.

How can this be considered perfect?

Therefore
the sage takes the left-hand tally, but exacts no payment from the people.

The man of virtue takes charge of the tally;

The man of no virtue takes charge of exaction.

It
is the way of heaven to show no favoritism.

It is for ever on the side of the good man.

Keep Your Obligations

When a great hatred is reconciled, naturally some hatred will remain. How can this be made good?

Therefore the sage keeps the obligations of his contract and exacts not from others. Those who have virtue attend to their obligations; those who have no virtue attend to their claims.

Heaven's Reason shows no preference but always assists the good man.

Behind every failure, is a success. If you blame, you will be blamed. The master takes responsibility for himself and is not concerned with the actions of others. He expects nothing from them, and doesn't rely on them. If a mistake is made he accepts it. Through this he avoids disturbance.

Settling a major enmity, residual enmity remains.

Responding enmity with virtue - how can this be good?

Thus, the sage holds the left half [of a promissory block] but does not demand payment.

One with virtue acts like that creditor;

one without virtue acts like the tax collector.

The cosmos's Direction does not play favoritism.

It [simply] provides people with goodness all the time.

You can resolve great rancor, but rancor always lingers on.

Understanding the more noble way,

a sage holds the creditor's half of contracts

and yet asks nothing of others.

Those with Integrity tend to such contracts;

those without Integrity tend to the collection of taxes.

The Way of heaven is indifferent, always abiding with people of nobility.

Deep grievances can be ameliorated, but residual ones remain.

How can this situation be improved?

Thus:

The sage holds the left half of the debt instrument, and never abuses the debtor.

A person of virtue just keeps the left portion; but

A person of no virtue abuses the debtor.

The way of Heaven is neutral,

But it always sides with the virtuous person.

Harmonize
great resentment

Seed the presence of a surplus of resentment

How can valuing actions happen peacefully?

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Take hold of the left of a contract

Yet lack censure in relating to men.

Presence of ideal controls the agreement

Absence of ideal controls its resolution.

The
tao of heaven is absent of favorites

It is entirely with the valuing man.

When the principle of a dispute has been settled (some accessory grievances) always remain, and things do not return to the state they were in before, (bruises remain).

(Therefore the Sage never questions it, despite his right). Keeping his half of the agreement, he does not exact the execution (of what is written).

He who knows how to conduct himself after the Virtue of the Principle, lets his written agreements sleep. He who does not know how to conduct himself thus, exacts his due.

Heaven is impartial. (If it were capable of some partiality), it would give advantage to good people, (those who act as in C. It would overwhelm them, because they ask for nothing).

After settling a great dispute

There must be remaining resentments

How can this be considered good?

Therefore the sage holds the left part of the contract

But does not demand payment from the other person

Those who have virtue hold the contract

Those without virtue hold the collections

The Heavenly Tao has no favorites

It constantly gives to the kind people

It doesn't matter how we say "no hard feelings," after a bitter dispute, there's bound to be ill-will and negative feelings. This cannot be a good thing.

Sages don't get into disputes in the first place because they give to others without expecting anything in return. It is as if they hold the left half of the lending agreement - the lender's copy - but do not use it to extract loan payments from the borrower.

Those who possess virtue are like the sages. Metaphorically speaking, they also hold the left half of the lending agreement. They give; they do not take.

Those who lack virtue are like the tax collectors. It is as if they hold the collections notice over other people. They take from everyone and give to no one.

Given this is the case, how can it be that generous souls prosper while misers seem to be forever pinching pennies? Shouldn't those who only take end up with more than those who only give?

It is not because the Tao plays favorites and treats giving people better. It is because the karmic principle - the Law of Cause and Effect - ensures that those who give in accordance with the Tao will always receive abundantly.

Notes

When the ancient Chinese people began building their civilization some five thousand years ago, they found themselves in need of a way to keep track of debts.

The method had to somehow be proof against forgery, so less trustworthy individuals wouldn't borrow funds and then deny it or claim a smaller amount. Also, this was back in the days before the invention of paper, so that made the problem even more difficult.

What they came up with was clever. Lender and borrower would get a piece of wood or tree bark, and carve the record of their transaction and agreement on it. Then, this contract would be split apart in the middle. The left part goes to the lender; the right to the borrower.

Thus, the left side of the contract is the lender's proof that he has a right to demand payments. When the loan has been paid, the lender gives the left side to the borrower, thus making the contract whole.

Because the tear in the wood or bark is uneven, it serves as the perfect and natural way to authenticate. A forged left side will never be able to match the right side - a brilliant solution.

The Tao of Giving

Someone who gives in accordance with the Tao observes the following guidelines:

1) Appropriate amount. Tao cultivators would not give so much that they damage their own ability to continue giving in the future. The important thing is to be like a small stream that keeps flowing, as opposed to an upended barrel that splashes water everywhere and has no more to give.

2) Detachment. Tao cultivators give with no expectations or attachments. They give only for the sake of giving, not to win recognition or showcase their generosity.

3) Based on need. Tao cultivators look for opportunities where giving would make the most significant difference for someone in need. In a snowstorm, they would deliver coal to someone who has trouble staying warm. This may not be very expensive to do, but it has meaning for the recipient that is priceless.

4) Not necessarily tangible. Tao cultivators recognize that material things and monetary values are not the only ways to give. They are also ready to give an encouraging word, a cheery greeting, a smile, a blessing, a pat on the back, a helping hand, recognition, forgiveness, courtesy, praise.... The world is full of wonderful ways to give.

ENFORCING CONTRACTS

When reconciling great hatred there will some remain. How can it be made good?

Therefore the wise man accepts the debit side of the account and does not have to enforce payment from others. They who have virtue (teh) keep their obligations, they who have no virtue insist on their rights. Tao of heaven has no favorites but always helps the good man.

In reconciling a great injury (yüan),

There is sure to have some injury left.

How can this be good?

Therefore the sage holds the left tally,

He does not blame others.

One who has te is in charge of the tally,

One who has no te is in charge of the tax law.

The Tao of heaven has no partiality (ch'in),

It is always with the good people.

Settling Disputes

Settling a great dispute leaves some hatred behind. Can this be good?

Therefore the truly wise defend the weak and do not seek vengeance.

The man with Teh fosters reconciliation; the man without Teh fosters raction. And so it is truly said: "While Tao is impartial, it permeates good men."

Great resentment, even when appeased, does not go away.

How can this be good?

Therefore, the Tao–Master keeps his promises,

but he does not look into whether others are keeping theirs.

The man of virtue (Te) monitors himself;

The man without virtue monitors others.

The Tao of Heaven plays no favorites,

but it is always manifest in the good man.

Seventy-nine

After a bitter quarrel, some resentment must remain.

What can one do about it?

Therefore the sage keeps his half of the bargain

But does not exact his due.

A man of Virtue performs his part,

But a man without Virtue requires others to fulfill their obligations.

The Tao of heaven is impartial.

It stays with good men all the time.

When the great enmity is allayed,

There must be some remaining hostility;

Even if one requites hostility with kindness,

How can that be considered perfect?

Therefore the sage keeps the stub of the receipt for a loan

But never presses for payment from people.

A man of virtue is as tolerant as the sage who keeps the stub of the receipt;

A man of no virtue is as harsh as tax collectors.

The Tao of heaven never shows favouritism;

It always helps those who are good.

You allay the great discontent,

Yet, surely, there will still remain some discontent.

How can this be considered good?

Therefore the sage

Holds the left-hand tally,

Makes no claims on the people.

The man of Te oversees the tally,

The man of no Te oversees tax-collection.

The way of Heaven favors none,

Always sides with the good man.

To bury the hatchet following a bitter struggle does not necessarily dispel the residual hatred.

How can it be called a good resolution?

The sage only carries the credit note but does not ask for the repayment.

A person with great virtue holds the credit note but does not insist on remittance.

The immoral person relentlessly extracts exorbitant taxes from the people.

Although the way of Dao is impartial, it always gives succour to good people.

Observance of Obligations

Ren Ch'i

In allaying a great grievance,

There is bound to be some grievance remaining.

How can this be called good?

Therefore the Sage holds the left tally,

But does not urge the other party to keep his word.

Thus the virtuous seeks to preserve the contract;

The unvirtuous seeks to blame the other party.

The Way of Heaven has no preferences,

But always suits the good man.

When reconciliation follows a great grievance,

How often there is a residue of grievance!

That can scarcely be called a settlement!

Therefore, the Sage, while himself fulfilling the harder part of a bargain,

Does not claim his due from the other.

He who uses the Virtue of the Tao, keeps to his bond;

He who does not use the Virtue of the Tao drives a hard bargain.

The Tao is no respecter of persons:

Its abundance is always at the service of the good.

When great ill-will is reconciled,

There remains ill-will.

How shall it be made good?

By the sage holding the left-hand tally

And laying no guilt on others.

If you have virtue, you do what you should.

If you have no virtue, you levy claims.

The Tao of heaven plays no favorites,

But it always succors the good.

Even after settling a great dispute, some resentment is likely to remain.

Can this be considered a true settlement?

Only by cultivating the virtue of wholeness and by returning injury with kindness can there be true harmony.

Therefore, one of deep virtue always gives without expecting gratitude.

One whose virtue is deep treats the world as if he were the debtor,

holding the left side of the tally.

He willingly repays the world through serving his fellow man.

One who is partially virtuous treats the world as if he were the creditor,

holding the right side of the tally.

He thinks the world owes him something and should repay him.

Although the subtle Way of the universe holds no favoritism or partiality,

it always supports those who are naturally virtuous.

LXXIX.

To
Sustain Agreements

When
parties long in animosity

Are
reconciled, a grudge there still will be,

Some
hatred yet remains from that old grudge,

And
what will best suffice to make it budge?

The
sage will then of his agreement hold

His
own part, leaving others uncontrolled,

Who
virtue has, the whole agreement names,

While
he who has not, only cites his claims.

The
Tao of Heaven no favoritism knows,

But
for the good will ever interpose.

To harmonize great enemies

We must possess that which far surpasses enmity.

We must be able to be at peace

In order to be active in Love.

That is why the self-controlled man holds the left-hand portion of the contract, but does not insist upon the other man producing his portion.

He who is virtuous may rule by a contract,

He whose virtue is within may rule by destroying it.

Akin to Heavenly Tao is Inner Life.

A constant giver is the man who loves.

When a great wound

is healed,

There will still

remain a scar.

Can this be

a desirable thing?

The Complete Thinker,

holding the left-hand tally

( the count of things to come),

Performs

their part

of the agreement,

But puts

no demands

on others.

The virtuous (powerful)

do their work;

The virtue-less (powerless)

knows only to put

taxes on the people.

The Laws of the Universe (Tao)

have no private feelings,

But

always agrees

with the constructive.

Though a great grievance may be appeased there is sure to remain some grievance. How can one stand well with others? By requiting grievances with Virtue.

Therefore the Saint, although he holds the left-hand tally, does not serve a summons on people.

He who has Virtue, controls the tally; he who has no Virtue, controls the levying.

The Way of heaven ahs no favouritism; it always gives (the opportunity of) standing well with people.

When a reconciliation is effected (between two parties) after a

great animosity, there is sure to be a grudge remaining (in the mind

of the one who was wrong). And how can this be beneficial (to the

other)?

Therefore
(to guard against this), the sage keeps the left-hand

portion of the record of the engagement, and does not insist on the

(speedy) fulfilment of it by the other party. (So), he who has the

attributes (of the Tao) regards (only) the conditions of the

engagement, while he who has not those attributes regards only the

conditions favourable to himself.

In
the Way of Heaven, there is no partiality of love; it is always

on the side of the good man.

Compromise with great resentment
will surely yield resentment that lingers.

How can that be called 'good?'
Thus,
Sages hold the debtor's side of contracts
and do not make claims upon others.

Thus
the person of DEI attends to their debts;
the person without DEI-ty attends
to their interest-ledgers.
The
way of Heaven IS impartial,
yet is ALWAYS on the side of the well-meaning.

There's
little good in making peace

If resentment lingers

You'll never see an end to blame

If everyone is pointing fingers

It's
better to be pointing

At the peaceful and creative place

Where you see naught but emptiness

And others say they see your face

WHEN a great wound is healed,

There will still remain a scar.

Can this be a desirable state of affairs?

Therefore, the Sage, holding the left-hand tally,

Performs his part of the covenant,

But lays no claims upon others.

The virtuous attends to his duties;

The virtueless knows only to levy duties upon the people. The Way of Heaven has no private affections,

But always accords with the good.

When conflicts and disputes are reconciled, there is certain to be some lingering ill-will and resentments.

How can this be rectified?

Consider this: The wise man will keep his part of the bargain, and not insist on fulfillment by the other party.

Thus it is that the good fulfill their end of obligations, while the ungood work hard to avoid payment.

While even though the way of Heaven is impartial, it smiles with favor on the good.

Difficulties remain, even after solving a problem.

How then can we consider that as good?

Therefore
the Master

does what she knows is right,

and makes no demands of others.

A virtuous person will do the right thing,

and persons with no virtue will take advantage of others.

The
Tao does not choose sides,

the good person receives from the Tao

because she is on its side.

If you get into an argument with a group member, and it does not come out the way you wish it would, do not pretend to compromise while withholding your true feelings.

Yield your position gracefully. Return to facilitating what is happening.

It is not your business to be right or to win arguments. It is not your business to find the flaws in the other person's position. It is not your business to feel belittled if the other person wins.

It is your business to facilitate whatever is happening, win or lose.

Because we are all one, there are no sides to take. When all is said and done, the wise leader goes along with what is happening anyway.

When enemies are reconciled, some resentment invariably remains.

How can this be healed?

Therefore the Sage makes good on his half of the deal

And demands nothing of others.

One who is truly good will keep his promise.

One who is not good will take what he can.

Heaven doesn't choose sides

It is always with the good people.

Conflict
almost always leaves some resentment

regardless of the nature of a peaceful

resolution.

How
does one achieve peace and harmony?

The sage fulfills her commitments

but does not demand others to fulfill theirs.

Those
who are confused

demand others to fulfill their commitments

but are unconcerned with fulfilling

their own.

Infinity
is indifferent.

It is at one with all people.

In resolving great Enmity, some hatred is sure to remain.

How can this be good ?

Thus does the wise man assume the debt, and not blame others.

There is Virtue in taking Responsibility.

There is no Virtue in taking everything.

Heaven's Way is impartial, but generally favors good men.

When a bad grudge is settled,

Some enmity is bound to remain.

How can this be considered acceptable?

Therefore the Sage keeps to his side of the contract

But does not hold the other party to their promise.

He who has Virtue will honour the contract,

Whilst he who is without Virtue expects others to meet their obligations.

It is the Way of Heaven to be impartial;

It stays always with the good man.

Suppression of an uprising does not eliminate the revolt.

How can one solve the problem by suppressing?

The wise person prefers to be the owner of debts

Who gives for ever but presses for no paying back.

The wise contractor gives but does not take.

The poor contractor takes but does not give.

The way of Heaven favors none.

It gives all the time and only the good ones can receive.

"When great hostilities are smoothed over there is always some hostility left." How could this be considered good?

And so the Wise Person: "Keeps hold of the left-hand contract tally, and doesn't make demands on others."

One who has Te is concerned with fulfilling his contract one who does not have Te concerns himself with collecting his due.

Heaven's Way: Not to have personal favourites, but to be invariably good to all.

Big resentment leaves consequences. Calm may be called goodness.

Therefore, the wise gives an oath not to condemn anyone.

Kind people live in accordance with this rule. Evil people do not.

The Primordial Tao is always on the side of kind people.

When laws and rules are too stringent,

People have the natural urge to violate them.

The Wise Person follows his duties without expectations,

Thus his virtue is acknowledged.

He does not take possession of own virtue,

Similarly as nature does, his will is not imposed,

Thus he is on the Way of Tao.

After
harmonizing a great grievance there must remain a residue of enmity. How can
that be regarded as good? For that reason the Sage takes the left portion of
the contract tally rather than trying to make (contractual) demands on people.
Those who have virtue take charge of [fulfilling obligations of] the contract.
Those who have no virtue take charge of exaction. The Dao of Heaven has no one
to whom it is close by birth. It always gives to the good person.

The settlement of great grudge always leaves some residue grudge!

How can this be remedied?

Therefore, the Sage retains the left stub of the contract,

And does not make claims on others.

The man with virtue keeps the contract,

While the man without virtue collects the tax.

The Tao of heaven plays no favoritism;

It is always for the good man.

The Power In Not Taking Advantage

Even when a great resentment is reconciled,

Some resentment must linger,

How can this be made good?

That is why Evolved Individuals

Hold the left side of the contract

And do not censure others.

Those with Power are in charge of the contract;

Those without Power are in charge of resolving it.

The Tao in Nature has no favorites.

It always works through the good person.

If you shatter someone's teapot, offer to replace it.

How can you think it is good

To settle a grievance too great

To ignore, when the settlement

Surely evokes other piques?

The
Wise Man therefore will select

The left-hand part of contract tallies:

He will not put the debt on other men.

This virtuous man promotes agreement;

The vicious man allots the blame.

"Impartial
though the Way of God may be,

It always favors good men."

When an attempt has been made to reconcile two sides in a great enmity, and there is surely some enmity remaining,

How can this be a good thing?

So, although the sage hold the counterfoil of receipt,

He does not force the debtor to pay back.

The moral man is as calm and unhurried as a bookkeeper is,

And the immoral man is as calculating as a rent collector is (while he is collecting the rent).

The Tao of Heaven has no partiality for any reason, and always helps the good man.

Bring harmony to great resentment, and some resentment is sure to remain.

How could this be considered good?

This is why the sage holds the left half of the tally

And does not place blame on the other party.

A person of virtue concerns himself with his contracts,

And the person of no virtue concerns himself with scrutinizing others.

The Dao of Heaven has no favorites but is always with the good man.

1. To make peace where there has been great resentment, there is bound to be
resentment left over.

2. How could this be regarded as good?

3. Therefore the Sage [holds] the right tally yet makes no demands of others.

4. For this reason, those who have virtue are in charge of the tally;

5. Those without virtue are in charge of the taxes.

6. The Way of Heaven has no favorites,

7. It's always with the good man.

[7a
Virtue—3,041 (characters)]

Sometimes,

when an argument is settled,

feelings of resentment still remain

on either side.

What's the point of carrying a grudge?

The Masters
care

about what they owe other people,

not what other people owe them.

People who are
in touch with Tao

do their duty.

People who aren't

try to force others into submission.

Tao doesn't
play favorites.

But if you do right by Tao,

Tao will do right by you.

.

Stay with the Good

Compromising with great hatred surely leaves some hatred.

How can this be considered good?

Therefore the wise keep their part of an agreement

and do not blame the other party.

The good fulfill their obligations;

the bad exact obligations from others.

The Way of heaven is impartial.

It always stays with the good.

When a great feud is settled a grudge often remains.

How can it be disspelled?

By putting helping before demanding.

The Sage respects the rights of others practicing putting-up-with getting-along-with, and sharing.

An unwise man knows only demanding and insists on treaties and advantages.

Yet the Tao of heaven knows no favorites forever it gives to the kind man.

Peace Settlement

Lao Tze says,

When a reconciliation is made between two parties, surely a grudge still remains in one of them.

How can this be counted as a decent method?

Therefore the sage guards against this method.

He keeps the left-hand tally, and does not insist on the fulfillment of it by others.

So he who has the attribute of the Tao keeps the tally;

while he who has not the attribute of the Tao keeps the record of taxing.

In the way of Heaven, there is no partiality of love;

it is always on the side of a good man.

FULFILLING ONE'S OBLIGATIONS

When
covenants and bonds are drawn

between the people of the land,

that they might know their obligations,

it is commonplace for many

to fail to meet their dues.

The
sage ensures his dues are met,

'though not expecting others to do the same;

in this way he is virtuous.

He
is without virtue of his own,

who asks of others that they fulfil

his obligations on his behalf.

The
way of nature does not impose

on matters such as these

but stays with the good for ever,

and acts as their reward.

Failure is an opportunity.

If you blame someone else,

there is no end to the blame.

Therefore the Master

fulfills her own obligations

and corrects her own mistakes.

She does what she needs to do

and demands nothing of others.

When a great hatred is reconciled there must be some hatred remaining.

How can this be made into perfection?

Thus, the Sage ruler granted rights to the people and required no repayment from them.

Hence, the office of a virtuous ruler is established for welfare of the people;

while the office of a virtueless ruler is established for taxation of the people.

The law of Nature is impartial yet it is always with the good man.

Reconciling a great hatred necessarily entails unsolved hatred.

How can this be kindful?

So the sage honors the left-hand tally but does not blame people.

Before the kind Action, hold onto the tally.

Before the kindless Action, hold onto the openness.

The Tao of heaven is impersonal.

It enhances those who are kind.

LXXIX

If
you have to make things bitter to get them settled,the bitterness will remain

The taoist, then, holds the debt but doesn't demand repayment

Thus, when he is repaid, the debt is forgotten

Fail that, and you will be treated like a tax collector

And known as such even by those who owe you nothing

The
tao plays no favorites

It supplies all who act with virtue

Harmonize Bitter Enemies

When you harmonize bitter enemies,

yet resentment is sure to linger,

how can this be called good?

Therefore sages keep their faith

and do not pressure others.

So the virtuous see to their promises,

while the virtueless look after precedents.

The Way of heaven is impersonal;

it is always with good people.

After big conflicts are reconciled, some hostility may remain.

Reply the resentment with kindness.

Is it not good?

Thus a sage keeps the creditor's deed but does not demand the payment.

People with Te are like creditors.

People without Te are like tax collectors.

Tao of the nature does not discriminate.

It constantly provides benefit to all people.

When a great resentment is healed, there will still remain a scar.

Can this be a desirable situation?

Therefore, the sage, holding the left-hand tally, performs his part of the covenant, but lays no claims upon others.

The virtuous man holds to the tally; the virtueless man worries about collecting money of the people.

The Way of Heaven has no favoritism, but often is on the side of the good man.

After the settlement of a big case,

someone could breach the agreement.

What can one do about it?

The sage keeps his half of the bargain, and not blame the others.

A man of Virtue performs his part,

A man without Virtue requires others to fulfill their obligations.

The Tao of heaven is impartial.

It awards virtuous men all the time.

Even though a truce is made between great enemies,

some enmity is bound to remain.

How can this be beneficial?

Therefore,
the True Person

undertakes the obligations of the agreerment

but makes no claim upon others.

The person who has Virtue shares with others.

The person who lacks Virtue takes fron others.

The
way of heaven has no favorites;

it always remains with what is good.

Stopping
wars

feeding the hungry in foreign lands

building inner-city housing projects

not using racist or sexist language

will not succeed

because the deeper problems are not solved.

Stay at home

claiming nothing from others

giving everything

and
the universe will give to you.

To allay the main discontent, but in a way that begets further discontents,
can hardly be top successful. And to patch up great hatred is sure to leave
some hatred behind; how can this be regarded as satisfactory?

So the wise man keeps the obligation of a contract

and refrains from blaming the other party. He stays where he is and does not
go round making claims on people.

Therefore good people attend to their obligations, while those without virtue
attend to other people's mistakes.

The way of heaven is impartial. It's always with the good man, without distinction
of persons, to keep the good firmly supplied.''

Compromise with great resentment will surely yield lingering resentment;

How can this be seen as good?

For this reason,

The sage holds the debtor's side of a contract and does not make claims upon others.

Therefore,

The man of integrity attends to his debts;

The man without integrity attends to his exactions.

The Way of heaven is impartial, yet is always with the good person.

When a compromise is effected after a long dispute, one of the parties retains a grudge: how can this be called a good settlement?

Therefore the wise man takes his part of the bond, and does not insist upon having the other.

The virtuous man attends only to his engagements in the bond, while the man without virtue contrives for his own advantage.

The Tao of Heaven has no favourites; it always aids the good man.

Welcome Your Own and Each Other's Failures

Welcome your own

and each other's failures.

They enable you to

correct your illusions,

refine your spirits,

and model your love.

In this wonderful situation

there is never need for blame.

There is a saying in Japanese business,

"Fix the problem, not the blame."

There will be times when your beloved

will truly disappoint you

and you will be greatly tempted

to assign guilt and blame.

If instead you work together

with creativity and imagination,

and together solve the problem,

your love will be unbounded.

To patch up great hatred is surely to leave some hatred behind. How can this be regarded as good?

Therefore the sage keeps the left-hand portion (obligation) of a contract And does not blame the other party.

Virtuous people attend to their left-hand portions, While those without virtue attend to other people's mistakes.

"The Way of Heaven has not favourites. It is always with the good man."

If terms to
end a quarrel leave bad feeling,

What good are they?

So a sensible man takes the poor end of the bargain

Without quibbling.

It is sensible to make terms,

Foolish to be a stickler:

Though heaven prefer no man,

A sensible man prefers heaven.

If you have a big feud, no matter how much you make peace, the resentment still lingers.

How can this make you a nice person?

Therefore, the great men did not push and harass people.

Those who have DE do not harass people; those who do not have DE always push and harass people.

The law of the heavens does not practice nepotism; it gives the benefit to the nice people.

After the reconciliation of great hostilities,

Lingering resentment always remains.

Can this be considered a true reconciliation?

Therefore, the sage returns injury with kindness.

He takes the position of a giver,

And does not make claims upon others.

The virtuous relates to the world as if he owes the world.

The non-virtuous relates to the world as if the world owes him.

Though the way of Heaven is impartial,

It always supports those who live in harmony with it.

Suppression of an uprising does not eliminate the revolt.

How can one solve the problem by suppressing?

The wise person prefers to be the owner of debts

Who gives for ever but presses for no paying back.

The wise contractor gives but does not take.

The poor contractor takes but does not give.

The way of Heaven favors none.

It gives all the time and only the good ones can receive.

When conflicts and disputes are reconciled, there is certain to be some lingering ill-will and resentments.

How can this be rectified?

Consider this: The wise man will keep his part of the bargain, and not insist on fulfillment by the other party.

Thus it is that the good fulfill their end of obligations, while the ungood work hard to avoid payment.

While even though the way of Heaven is impartial, it smiles with favor on the good.

