===== Chapter 57 =====

By uprightness, govern the kingdom.

By rarely using soldiers

[And] by means of non-administration

Take the world.

By what means do I know this to be so?

By this:

The world greatly shuns and avoids [the poor]

And the people [remain] completely impoverished.

The people greatly sharpen weapons

[And] the kingdom and households grow dark.

The people [become] excessively crafty and clever

[And] strange things start [to happen].

Laws and directives are increasingly promulgated

[And thus] more robbers and thieves exist.

Therefore do the sages say:

"I do not administer, and the people change themselves.

I am pleased with stillness, and the people correct themselves.

I do not [meddle in their] affairs, and the people grow rich by themselves.

I do not desire, and the people simplify themselves."

Use the unexpected to govern the country, Use surprise to wage war, Use non-action to win the world. How do I know? Like this!

The more prohibitions and rules, The poorer people become. The sharper people's weapons, The more they riot.

The more skilled their techniques, The more grotesque their works. The more elaborate the laws, The more they commit crimes.

Therefore the Sage says, I do nothing And people transform themselves. I enjoy serenity And people govern themselves.

I cultivate emptiness And people become prosperous. I have no desires And people simplify themselves.

To govern the state resort to what's regular.

To win a war resort to what's unusual.

But to conquer the world refrain from meddling.

How do I know of these methods?

I do because of what's within me.

The fewer the people's freedoms

the poorer the people become.

The more sharp weapons the people possess,

The greater disorder there is in the state.

The more diverse the people's skills,

The more unusual things they produce.

The more numerous the laws,

The more criminals there are.

Therefore, the sage says:

I take no action,

Yet people transform by themselves.

I prefer to remain calm,

Yet people by themselves become correct.

I refrain from meddling,

Yet people by themselves begin to prosper.

I have no desires,

Yet people by themselves become simple

Like uncut wood.

GOVERNMENT

With justice and righteousness, Nations are well governed.

With cunning strategy, Wars are successfully waged.

Through Wu-Wei, All Things are mastered.

Intuitively, this is felt:

Prohibitions and restrictions being many -

Being burdened with ritual avoidance,

The people become poorer.

Weapons being in abundance,

The state increasingly abounds in wars, chaos and disorder.

Scheming and cunning artifice being commonplace,

Pernicious contrivances are invented -

Strange things happen.

Laws, rules, statutes and ordinances being many,

Thieves, bandits and dissidents increase and abound.

Thus the Sage says:

If I do nothing,

The people will spontaneously resolve contention.

If I love quietude,

The people will spontaneously become tranquil, honest and righteous.

If I cease interference,

The people will spontaneously prosper.

If I have no desires,

The people will spontaneously return to their original simplicity.

Connect Heaven and Earth to govern the country.

Disconnect Heaven and Earth to use your weapons.

By means of not working, you can take hold of Heaven below (the sacred body).

I know this to be so!

In Heaven below, excess restrictions and prohibitions increase poverty.

People have an excess of sharp weapons, the country's families are in great disorder.

If people are more skillful at being cunning, more abnormal things arise.

Law and order become more and more prominent.

Robbers and thieves appear.

Thus the sage speaks:

I practice not doing (wu wei) and the people naturally transform.

I welcome peace and the people naturally create a connection between Heaven and Earth.

I do not interfere and the people are naturally wealthy.

I am without desires and the people are naturally pure like uncarved wood or uncut jade.

THE TRUE INFLUENCE

One may govern a state by restriction; weapons may be used with skill and

cunning; but one acquireth true command only by freedom, given and taken.

How
am I aware of this? By experience that to multiply restrictive laws

in the kingdom impoverisheth the people; the use of machines causeth

disorder in state and race alike. The more men use skill and cunning,

the more machines there are; and the more laws there are, the more felons

there are.

A
wise man has said this: I will refrain from doing, and the people will

act rightly of their own accord; I will love Silence, and the people will

instinctively turn to perfection; I will take no measures, and the people

will enjoy true wealth; I will restrain ambition, and the people will

attain simplicity.

A state may be ruled by (measures of) correction; weapons of war maybe used with crafty dexterity; (but) the kingdom is made one's own (only)by freedom from action and purpose. How do I know that it is so? By thesefacts:-In the kingdom the multiplication of prohibitive enactments increasesthe poverty of the people; the more implements to add to their profit thatthe people have, the greater disorder is there in the state and clan; themore acts of crafty dexterity that men possess, the more do strange contrivancesappear; the more display there is of legislation, the more thieves androbbers there are. Therefore a sage has said, 'I will do nothing (of purpose),and the people will be transformed of themselves; I will be fond of keepingstill, and the people will of themselves become correct. I will take notrouble about it, and the people will of themselves become rich; I willmanifest no ambition, and the people will of themselves attain to the primitivesimplicity.'

With laws men rule a state

With ruses people make war

Without laws and without ruses you'll have a peaceful mankind

How do I know this?

Well, because of the following:

The more orders and prescriptions, the more defiant the people become

The more arming, the bigger the chaos

The more knowledge and science, the more machines and artificiality

The more rules and decisions, the more thieves and robbers

Therefore a wise man says:

I don't do anything, and the people change spontaneously

I take rest, and the people become honest spontaneously

I don't make an issue of anything, and the people find wealth inside themselves

I don't want anything, and the people return to simplicity

A good leader guides by example; A bad leader resorts to force and intrigue. Everything gains by noninterference. How do I know this?

Consider the evidence: The more restrictions and taxes there are, the poorer the people become. The more weapons people possess, the more they fight.

The more complicated machines become, the greater the danger from mechanical accident. The more laws are enacted and taxes assessed, the greater the number of law-breakers and tax-evaders.

This is why the intelligent man concludes: When I attend to my own business, other people are able to attend to theirs. When I exemplify self-reliance, other people will devote themselves to the exercise of their own intelligence.

When I make no demands upon them, other people themselves will prosper. When I express no desire to interfere in their lives, others will become genuinely self-sufficient.

"Kingdoms can only be governed if rules are kept;

Battles can only be won if rules are broken."

But the adherence of all under heaven can only be won by letting-alone.

How do I know that it is so?

By this.

The more prohibitions there are, the more ritual avoidances,

The poorer the people will be.

The more "sharp weapons" there are,

The more benighted will the whole land grow.

The more cunning craftsmen there are,

The more pernicious contrivances will be invented.

The more laws are promulgated,

The more thieves and bandits there will be.

Therefore a sage has said:

So long as I "do nothing" the people will of themselves be transformed.

So long as I love quietude, the people will of themselves go straight.

So long as I act only by inactivity the people will of themselves become prosperous.

So long as I have no wants

The people will of themselves return to the "state of the Uncarved Block".

Rule the country with sincerity.

Wage war with cunning.

Master the universe with indifference.

How do I know this is the way it is?

Because of this:

The more taboos, the poorer the people's spirit.

The sharper men's weapons, the more trouble in the land.

The greater the ingenuity, the more clutter in the world.

The more abundant the laws, the more abundant the thieves.

Therefore the sage says:

I take no action and the people naturally reform.

I remain at peace and the people become content.

I do not meddle and the people become prosperous.

I desire nothing and the people return to original nature.

Use principle to govern a country

Use tricks to wage a war

Use the least effort to capture the world

By what means do we know that things are really like this?

By This

There are more taboos & restrictions in the world

But the people grow more impoverished

The people have more productive implements

(But) countries & clans grow more disturbed

(As) others get more clever & artful

Bizarre things happen more often

The more that matters of law are proclaimed

The more robbers & looters there will be

And so the wise ones will claim:

We do nothing

And humanity evolves on its own

We favor stillness

And humanity governs itself

We do not make an effort

And humanity enriches itself

We have no ambition

And humanity simplifies itself

Government

Use the upright and correct to order the state;

Use surprise tactics when you use troops.

Use unconcern with affairs

To take control of the world.

How do I know that this is so?

Well, the more taboos and prohibitions

There are in the world,

The poorer the people will be;

The more sharp weapons the people possess,

The more muddled the states will be.

The more knowledge and skill people have,

The more novel things will appear.

The more legal matters are made prominent,

The more robbers and thieves there will be.

Therefore the words of the Sage say:

I do nothing,

And the people of themselves are transformed.

I love tranquility,

And people of themselves are upright.

I am unconcerned with affairs,

And the people of themselves become rich.

I desire not to desire,

and the people of themselves

Are genuine and simple,

like unvarved wood.

Govern a nation by following nature. Fight a war with unexpected moves. Win the world by letting go. How do I know this? From seeing these:

The more prohibitions there are, the poorer people become. The more weapons there are, the darker things become.

The more laws there are, the greater the number of scoundrels.

Therefore the sage says: I take no action, and people transform themselves. I love tranquility, and people naturally do what is right.

I don't interfere, and people prosper on their own. I have no desires, and people return to simplicity.

In government, objectives are clarified.

In warfare, objectives are concealed.

In following the Tao, objectives are discarded.

How do I know that this is so?

By feeling it from within.

With every commandment thrust upon the people,

They become more impoverished and alienated.

As the weapons of the state grow ever more destructive,

The more contagious is the fear that desolates the nation.

The further science spreads its hegemony of the intellect,

The more demonic are the products that roll off the assembly line.

As the precedents of litigation grow, and the statutory codes accumulate,

The politicians and criminals will proliferate and flourish.

The counsel of the Sage is different:

Let your action lack force,

And there will be spontaneous transformation.

Let meditation guide you,

And the natural order will arise.

Abandon power-

Lead only by example and consensus,

And there will be abundance in the land.

Defeat desire, let innocence be your law,

And your nation will return

To its deepest, simple nature.

Clearly, there are points in this book where Lao Tzu "takes the gloves off," and this is one of them. Yet this verse goes far beyond a mere diatribe against laws and lawyers, armies and weapons, technologies of dull convenience, and the depredations of politicians and corporate tyrants, for the poet again offers a natural alternative to the proliferation of tyranny. As amazing as it may be to contemplate how little humans appear to have changed in 2,600 years, we must also read this poem with a view to its practical purpose: the gifts of peace, abundance, and true progress that we naturally desire as both individuals and as nations are more readily available to us than we have been led to believe by those who would define them in terms of legislation, power, and the manipulation of Nature. Drop the struggle, for there is nothing that needs to be fought; let the meditative life described in the previous poem guide you and your nation; lead by example and consensus, not with force or commandment. This is the way of return that is spoken of throughout this book, and the poet would like us to understand that though it must begin within each individual, it can continue in an entire nation.

Be Lawful, Not Full of Laws

Rule
by what is right.

Wage war by clever strategy.

Win the world by being passive.

How do I know? By this:

More
restrictions mean weaker people.

More weapons mean a troubled state.

More cunning means many surprises.

More laws mean more violators.

Be
passive and the people will be reformed.

Be serene and the people will be righteous.

Be peaceable and the people will be wealthy.

Be selfless and the people will be simple and serene.

Rule the Empire with uprightness. The Empire is won by non-concern. How do I know this? Thus: The more superstitious restrictions in the land the poorer the people; the more the people are concerned with the administration the more benighted the state and the clans; the more craftiness is displayed the greater the

number of novelties which arise. The more legislation there is the more thieves and robbers increase.

It is for these reasons that a sage has said: "I do nothing, but the people spontaneously reform. I love tranquility, and the people spontaneously become upright. I have no concerns, and the people naturally grow wealthy. I am without desire, and of their own free will the people revert to primitive simplicity."

Albeit one governs the country by rectitude,

And carries on wars by strategems,

Yet one must rule the empire by meddling with no business.

The empire can always be ruled by meddling with no business.

Otherwise, it can never be done.

How do I know this is so?

By this:

The more restrictions and avoidances are in the empire,

The poorer become the people;

The more sharp implements the people keep,

The more confusions are in the country;

The more arts and crafts men have,

The more are fantastic things produced;

The more laws and regulations are given,

The more robbers and thieves there are.

Therefore the Sage says;

Inasmuch as I betake myself to non-action, the people of themselves become developed.

Inasmuch as I love quietude, the people of themselves become righteous.

Inasmuch as I make no fuss, the people of themselves become wealthy.

Inasmuch as I am free from desire, the people of themselves remain simple.

Laissez Faire Politics

Use correcting to order the state.

Use shock in deploying military force.

Use absence of social matters to take charge of the social world.

How do I know these are so?

With this.

The more the social world has to elude,

the more the people are impoverished.

The more the people have beneficial artifacts,

the more the state and society are befuddled.

The more humans are skilled and clever

the more strange natural kinds crop up.

The more standards of behavior and commands are promulgated,

the more thieves and robbers there are.

Hence sages say:

I lack deeming-action and the people self-transform.

I remain calm and the people self-correct.

I avoid social matters and the people self-enrich.

I lack desires and the people self-simplify (become like uncarved wood).

Guide the country through tranquillity.

Engage in war with rare operations.

Win over the world through non-action.

How am I aware that this ought to be so?

Because of this, the more restrictions and limitations there are,

The more impoverished men will be.

The more arms men possess,

The more disordered the country will be.

The more scheming and deceitful men are,

The more strange things will occur.

The more rules and precepts are enforced,

The more bandits and crooks will be produced.

Hence, we have the words of the wise:

Through my non-action,

Men are spontaneously transformed.

Through my quiescence,

Men spontaneously become tranquil.

Through my non-interfering,

Men spontaneously increase their wealth.

Through my non-willing,

Men spontaneously return to original simplicity.

Govern the nation with correctness.

Resort to arms with surprise manoeuvres.

Obtain the land under Heaven without tiring out the people.

How do I know this?

Because:

The more rules there are in the country,

the poorer the people will become.

The more power the people hold,

the more confused the country will become.

The more skills and intelligence the people possess,

the more valuable goods will be created and the more strict the laws will become,

yet the more thieves and robbers will breed.

That is why the sage says:

'I do nothing, and the people are nurtured by themselves.'

'I do not tire people and drain the treasury, and the people become rich by themselves.'

'I prefer quietness, and the people behave correctly by themselves.'

'I have no desire, and the people return to the simple life by themselves.'

'I have no emotions, and the people become pure by themselves.'

Use the norm to govern the state;

Use the abnormal to conduct warfare;

Use nondisturbance to win all under heaven.

How do I know it should be so?

For the more prohibitions and taboos in the empire,

The poorer the people;

The more sharp weapons the sovereign has,

The more chaotic state and fief;

The craftier the sovereign,

The more perverse things will arise;

The more ostentatious royal processions,

The more robbers and thieves there will be.

Hence, the sage man's saying goes:

"If I implement nonaction,

The people will live and grow spontaneously;

If I love stillness,

The people will turn aright spontaneously;

If I create no disturbances,

The people will become rich spontaneously;

If I desire to be desireless,

The people will turn into unhewn logs spontaneously."

Make all the weapons blunt,

Cut everything that is tangled,

Make everything that is shiny dull,

Mix with anything that is as humble as dust,

And this is called absolute equality.

Therefore

One cannot get close to it

Nor can one get away from it.

It is impossible to derive benefit from it,

Nor to be harmed by it.

It does not publicize a person's honor,

Nor does it publicize a person's shame.

Therefore it is the most exalted thing in the world.

Govern the state by being straightforward;

Wage war by being crafty;

But win the empire by not being meddlesome.

How
do I know that it is like that?

By means of this.

The
more taboos there are in the empire

The poorer the people;

The more sharpened tools the people have

The more benighted the state;

The more skills the people have

The further novelties multiply;

The better known the laws and edicts

The more thieves and robbers there are.

Hence
the sage says,

I take no action and the people are transformed of themselves;

I prefer stillness and the people are rectified of themselves;

I am not meddlesome and the people prosper of themselves;

I am free from desire and the people of themselves become simple like the uncarved
block.

Simplicity in Habits

With rectitude one governs the state; with craftiness one leads the army; with non-diplomacy one takes the empire. How do I know that it is so? Through IT.

The more restrictions and prohibitions are in the empire, the poorer grow the people. The more weapons the people have, the more troubled is the state. The more there is cunning and skill, the more startling events will happen. The more mandates and laws are enacted, the more there will be thieves and robbers.

Therefore the holy man says: I practise non-assertion, and the people of themselves reform. I love quietude, and the people of themselves become righteous. I use no diplomacy, and the people of themselves become rich. I have no desire, and the people of themselves remain simple.

To be a good father, you must follow the natural way. There can be no static ideas. The children are allowed to follow their own course. The more rules you have, the less they will obey. The more punishment you give, the less happy they will be. The more you interfere, the less self-reliant they are. Therefore a master says: I do not create rules and the children act truthfully. I do not punish, and the children are happy. I do not interfere, and the children develop naturally. If a father has no desires for his children, their fulfilment is guaranteed.

Govern a state with orthodoxy;

fight a war with heterodoxy;

take the world with laissez-faire.

How do I know this is so?

Because:

The world is full of prohibitions, yet the populace is poor;

People are stacked with weapons, yet the states are in turmoil;

People are loaded with cleverness, yet strange schemes sprout;

Rules are stringent and well known, yet robbers and thieves abound.

Thus, the sage says:

Let me practice laissez-faire, and the populace self-develop;

Let me seek serenity, and the populace self-manage;

Let me be without fanfare, and the populace self-prosper;

Let me discard avarice, and the populace self-simplify.

You may govern the nation through principle

and lead armies to victory through craft,

but you win all beneath heaven through indifference.

How can I know this to be so?

Through this.

The more prohibitions rule all beneath heaven the deeper poverty grows among the people.

The more shrewd leaders there are the faster dark confusion fills the nation.

The more cleverness people learn the faster strange things happen.

The faster laws and decrees are issued the more bandits and thieves appear.

Therefore a sage says:

I do nothing

and the people transform themselves.

I cherish tranquility

and the people rectify themselves.

I cultivate indifference

and the people enrich themselves.

I desire nothing

and the people return of themselves to uncarved simplicity.

Govern a state by fair rules.

Conduct military operations by surprise strategies.

Take over an empire as a nonevent.

How do I know these should be so?

Because:

The more prohibitions proliferate, the poorer the people;

The more sharp weapons people possess, the more chaotic the state;

The more cunning people become, the more abnormal the society;

The more laws promulgate, the more robbers and thieves appear.

Thus a wise ruler says:

I take no action, the people are naturally peaceful;

I love tranquility, the people naturally become orderly;

I plan no wasteful event, the people naturally grow prosperous;

I entertain no desire, the people naturally remain simple and honest.

When
governing the nation happens correctly

Surprising use of strategy happens.

Absent of effort grabbing the world happens.

Why
do I know this is so?

This just happens.

The
world has an abundance of prohibitions and taboos

Yet people become increasingly inadequate

People have an abundance of beneficial tools

Confusion multiplies in the families of the nation

Men have an abundance of skills and cleverness

Surprising things arise and multiply

Laws and decrees multiply conspicuously

Robbers and thieves are present in abundance.

So
sages say

I am absent of action yet people transform themselves

I am fond of stillness yet people correct themselves

I am absent of effort yet people are of themselves wealthy

I am absent from desire yet people of themselves exhibit
true nature.

One can govern with rectitude, one can wage war with competence, but it takes non-action to win and hold the empire. How do I know that this is so? From what I am going to say:

The more rules there are, the less people enrich themselves. The more taxes there are, the less order there is.

The more ingenious inventions there are, the fewer serious and useful objects there are. The more detailed the penal code, the more thieves abound. Multiplication ruins everything.

Therefore the programme of the Sage is quite the contrary. Not acting, And the people amend themselves. Staying peaceful, And the people rectify themselves.

Doing nothing, And the people enrich themselves. Wishing for nothing, And the people come back to natural spontaneity.

Govern a country with upright integrity

Deploy the military with surprise tactics

Take the world with non-interference

How do I know this is so?

With the following:

When there are many restrictions in the world

The people become more impoverished

When people have many sharp weapons

The country becomes more chaotic

When people have many clever tricks

More strange things occur

The more laws are posted

The more robbers and thieves there are

Therefore the sage says:

I take minimal action, and the people transform themselves

I prefer quiet, and the people right themselves

I do not interfere, and the people enrich themselves

I have no desires, and the people simplify themselves

Ruling a country and using the military are two sides of the coin, and require two different approaches. Using clever tactics to surprise and confuse the enemy is extremely advantageous in that victory can be quickly achieved with minimal loss of troops. Ruling a country is just the opposite. You wouldn't want to use clever tactics to surprise and confuse your own people. Instead, you want to treat them with straightforward honesty, and communicate in a way that is clear and easy to understand.

The ruler who meddles always ends up with poor results. Therefore, wise rulers refrain from interference. They don't try to change people - it is an impossible and thankless task. Instead, they let nature take its course. Their role is to provide gentle guidance.

Throughout history, sages have studied human society and made careful observations. They note that the more rules and regulations there are, the poorer people become. This in turn weakens the ruler's power base - exactly the opposite of what the ruler tried to achieve with rules and regulations in the first place.

In such a restrictive and impoverished environment, many people turn to crime as a way to survive. They take up weapons to steal or rob; violence and chaos increase as a result. They also become increasingly tricky in attempts to get around restrictions or exploit loop holes. Their cunning will often yield surprising and even bizarre results.

The above is why the sage would advise the emperor as follows:

If I were you, I would not take actions with any attachments or expectations of some specific outcome. This lack of contrivance will naturally lead the people toward self-transformation.

I would clear my mind and quiet the internal chatter before attending to the affairs of the people. My calmness and serenity can't help but have an effect on people so that they will wish to straighten things out themselves.

I would interfere as little as possible. Without interference, people can freely express their enterprising nature. Trade and commerce blossom, and before too long the people will be wealthy by their own efforts.

I would demonstrate by example my own relinquishing of excess desires. When people see how joyously my life becomes when it is totally free of clutter and the blind pursuit of material things, they too will want to practice simplicity in everything they do.

THE HABIT OF SIMPLICITY

The empire is administered with righteousness; the army is directed by craft; the people are captivated by non-diplomacy. How do I know it is so? By this same Tao.

Among people the more restrictions and prohibitions there are, the poorer they become. The more people have weapons, the more the state is in confusion. The more people are artful and cunning the more abnormal things occur. The more laws and orders are issued the more thieves and robbers abound.

Therefore the wise man says: If a ruler practices wu wei the people will reform of themselves. If I love quietude the people will of themselves become righteous. If I avoid profit-making the people will of themselves become prosperous. If I limit my desires the people will of themselves become simple.

Govern a state by (i) the normal (cheng);

Conduct warfare as (i) the abnormal (ch'i);

Take the empire when (i) there is no business.

How do I know such should be the case?

By the following:

In an empire with many prohibitions,

People are often poor;

When people have many sharp weapons,

The state is in great darkness (tzu hun);

When persons abound in ingenuity (ch'iao),

Abnormal (ch'i) objects multiply (tzu ch'i);

When laws are abundantly promulgated (tzu chang),

There are many thieves and brigands.

Therefore the sage says:

I do not act (wei),

Hence the people transform by themselves (tzu-hua);

I love tranquillity (ching),

Hence the people are normal by themselves (tzu-cheng);

I have no business,

Hence the people grow rich by themselves;

I have no desire,

Hence the people are like the uncarved wood by themselves (tzu-p'u).

Be Lawful, Not Full of Laws

Rule by what is right. Wage war by clever strategy. Win the world by being passive. How do I know? By this: more restritions mean weaker people; more weapons mean a troubled state; more cunning means many surprises; more laws mean violators. Therefore be passive and the people will be peaceful; be serene and the people will be pricipled; be reserved and the people will be wealthy; be selfless and the people will be simple and serene.

In governing, employ no surprises.

In waging war, employ only surprises.

Win the world with non–ado.

How do I know this? Like this!

The more rules and regulations there are,

the poorer the people become.

The more experts there are, the more confusion there is.

The more skillful and clever technicians there are,

the more horrifying inventions are produced.

The more "law and order" there is, the higher the crime–rate.

Therefore, the Tao–Master says,

I do nothing, and the people govern themselves.

I practice keeping quiet, and the people find justice.

I seek emptiness, and the people prosper.

I have no desires, and the people return

to a natural and simple life.

Fifty-seven

Rule a nation with justice.

Wage war with surprise moves.

Become master of the universe without striving.

How do I know that this is so?

Because of this!

The more laws and restrictions there are,

The poorer people become.

The sharper men's weapons,

The more trouble in the land.

The more ingenious and clever men are,

The more strange things happen.

The more rules and regulations,

The more thieves and robbers.

Therefore
the sage says:

I take no action and people are reformed.

I enjoy peace and people become honest.

I do nothing and people become rich.

I have no desires and people return to the good and simple life.

Rule the state with peace and inaction;

Wage a war with crafty tricks;

Governing the world by not troubling the people.

How do I know it is the right way?

The reason is as follows:

The more prohibitions there are in the world,

The poorer the people;

The more weapons the people own,

The more chaotic the state;

The more skills the people have,

The more strange things occur;

The more laws and orders are issued,

The more thieves and robbers there are.

Thus the sage says,

If I prefer inaction,

The people will naturally crave for peace;

If I act little,

The people will be naturally rectified;

If I am not meddlesome,

The people will naturally become rich;

If I get rid of desires,

The people will naturally become simple.

"Govern the state according to what is right;

Use the troops by surprise tactics."

But take all under Heaven through no-action.

How do I know this is so?

Because of this -

The more bans and taboos under Heaven,

The poorer the people;

The more sharp instruments in the hands of the people,

The more trouble for the state;

The more skills the people have,

The more fanciful inventions appear;

The more laws and decrees,

The more thieves and robbers.

Therefore the sage says:

"I engage in no-action, and the people transform of themselves;

I love stillness, and the people correct themselves;

I engage in no work, and the people prosper of themselves;

I am free from desire, and the people turn into the uncarved block of themselves."

You should govern a country by moral rectitude.

You should fight a war by employing stratagems.

You should follow the principle of non-intervention to rule a country.

How do I know all these are going to work?

Let us look at the followings:

The more rules and regulations you establish, the more destitute the people become.

The more intense the machination amongst the ruling classes, the more discordant the country will become.

The more cunning the people, the more outlandish things they do.

The more laws you proclaim, the more thieves you produce.

Therefore, the sage says:

"I follow non-action, and thus my people will live harmoniously.

I remain calm, and thus my people become righteous.

I do not meddle, and thus my people become more prosperous.

I have no desire, and thus my people will be simple and contented."

Atmosphere of Innocence

Ch'un Feng

Use justice to rule a country;

Use strange tactics to conduct battles;

Use non-assertion to win the world.

How do I know this should be the case?

By this -

When the world abounds in prohibitions,

The people will become impoverished.

When men have plenty of weapons in hand,

The state will be in great confusion.

When men have plenty of techniques and skills,

Queer articles will crop up in abundance.

When laws and decrees are numerous and manifest,

Bandits and robbers will increase and multiply.

Therefore, the Sage has said -

I practice non-interference,

And the people reform themselves;

I love to be quiescent,

And the people become upright;

I do not assert myself,

And the people become wealthy;

I cherish no desires,

And the people become simple and innocent.

"The government of a country is best achieved by carrying out the rules.

The winning of wars is best achieved by the employment of artful strategy."

But the winning over of the community is best achieved by non-interference.

How do I know that this is so?

By This.

The more the people are forbidden to do this and that,

The poorer they will be.

The more sharp weapons the people possess,

The more will darkness and bewilderment spread through the land.

The more craft and cunning men have,

The more useless and pernicious contraptions will they invent.

The more laws and edicts are imposed,

The more thieves and bandits there will be.

Hence these sayings of a Sage:

"If I work through Non-action, the people will transform themselves.

If I love the Stillness, the peole will grow righteous of themselves.

If I do not fuss or interfere, the people will grow wealthy of themselves;

If I am free from desire, the people will return to unspoiled simplicity.

Govern the country by regular rules;

Direct the army by cunning moves;

But win the world by avoiding fuss.

How do I know that this is so?

Inward light!

Beneath heaven,

The more rules and prohibitions there are,

The poorer the people become.

The sharper the weapons there are,

The greater the country's confusion.

The cleverer the people become,

The more cunning acts take place.

The more laws and orders there are,

The more thieves and robbers appear.

Therefore the sage says:

I do nothing,

And the people of themselves reform.

I love stillness,

And the people of themselves grow straight.

I don't fuss,

And the people of themselves get rich.

I don't want,

And the people of themselves grow simple.

When serving the public, use upright means.

When commanding troops in war, employ the principle of surprise.

To win the world, do nothing to interfere with it.

Why?

Because the more prohibitions and inhibitions that are imposed on people,

the more difficult their lives become.

The more destructive weapons a nation or its people possess,

the poorer the people of that country become,

and the greater is the chaos that occurs in the world.

The more clever and crafty people become,

the more often strange things happen.

The more laws and ordinances there are,

the more criminals and dissidents will arise.

Therefore, the ancient sages of natural virtue said:

"I do nothing, and people's contention dissolves by itself.

I enjoy serenity, and people rectify themselves.

I make no effort, and people enrich themselves.

I have no desire, and people return to simplicity."

LVII.

Plain
Lessons

Let
the upright rule the state,

And
the craftful the army lead,

But
the realm can only be made one s own

When
from active scheming freed.

How
do I know this is so?

By
facts that are open to all,

As
you multiply prohibitive laws

The people
to poverty fall.

You
increase disorder as well,

When
you increase the weapons of war,

And
the more and more artful and cunning men grow,

The
more and more crafty contrivance they show,

And the more laws and more thieves there are.

Said
the sage, I do nothing, and men

Of
themselves transformed will be,

I
love to keep still, they have uprightness,

I do
no scheming, and wealth they possess,

I
have no ambition, and plain-mindedness

Will
come spontaneously.

To govern a kingdom, use righteousness.

To conduct a war, use strategy.

To be a true world-ruler, be occupied with Inner Life.

How do I know this is so?

By this:

The more restrictive the laws, the poorer the people.

The more machinery used, the more trouble in the kingdom.

The more clever and skilful the people, the more do they make artificial things.

The more the laws are in evidence, the more do thieves and robbers abound.

That is why the self-controlled man says:

If I act from Inner Life the people will become transformed in themselves.

If I love stillness the people will become righteous in themselves.

If I am occupied with Inner Life the people will become enriched in themselves.

If I love the Inner Life the people will become pure in themselves.

You lead a group with correctness;

You fight a war by moves not thought of by your enemies;

You win the world by not using effort.

How do I know this is so?

By what is within me!

The more things that are forbidden

and limited in the world,

The poorer the people become.

(Freedom for the people is required for a full life.)

The more destructive the weapons

the people possess,

The greater confusion controls the land.

(People are dangerous to other people and the greater the tools of

destruction in their hands the more they will destroy.)

The more clever and tricky the men,

The more often strange things happen.

(People who cheat the Laws of the Universe cause a lack of balance which

can not last.)

The more well spoken the laws and rulings,

The more robbers and thieves there are.

(The more rules there are, the more likely people will break them in the

course of life.

Then after breaking some rules the other rules are less respected and

criminals are considered normal citizens.)

The Complete Thinker says:

I live a simple life,

and the people change themselves.

I love quiet,

and the people settle down in their regular jobs.

I look to effortlessness,

and the people grow rich.

I have no desires,

and the people return to Simplicity.

A State may be ruled by rectification and a war may be fought by stratagems, but the Empire is gained by non-action.

The Empire is gained by remaining constantly in non-action. As soon as one becomes active, one is unable to gain the Empire.

How do I know that this is so? By this:

The more taboos and prohibitions there are in the Empire, the poorer the people will be.

The more useful implements the people have, the more state and dynasty will be in confusion.

The more cunning craftsmen there are, the more bizarre contrivances will spring up.

The more laws and ordinances are promulgated, the more thieves and robbers will there be.

Therefore a Saint has said:

"If I practice doing nothing, the people will of themselves be correct.

If I love stillness, the people will of themselves be correct.

If I practice non-action, the people will of themselves become rich.

If I practice being without desires, the people will of themselves become simple."

A state may be ruled by (measures of) correction; weapons of

war may be used with crafty dexterity; (but) the kingdom is made one's

own (only) by freedom from action and purpose.

How
do I know that it is so? By these facts:--In the kingdom the

multiplication of prohibitive enactments increases the poverty of the

people; the more implements to add to their profit that the people

have, the greater disorder is there in the state and clan; the more

acts of crafty dexterity that men possess, the more do strange

contrivances appear; the more display there is of legislation, the

more thieves and robbers there are.

Therefore
a sage has said, 'I will do nothing (of purpose), and the

people will be transformed of themselves; I will be fond of keeping

still, and the people will of themselves become correct. I will take

no trouble about it, and the people will of themselves become rich; I

will manifest no ambition, and the people will of themselves attain to

the primitive simplicity.'

Rule your state with uprightness,
deploy your troops with craft;

gain all under heaven through noninterference.
How
do I actually KNOW this is right?
WELL;

the
more 'taboos' or prohibitions under heaven
the poorer the people are.

The more clever the devices the people have
the more confused the state and
the ruling house.
The more scientific knowledge there is
the stranger
the anomalies that spring up.
The more laws there are in the land
the
more bandits and thieves.
Therefore,
Sages say:
"I Do Nothing Much Personally
yet the people transform themselves.

I am fond of stillness
yet the people correct their own ways.
I
do not interfere in affairs
yet the people enrich themselves.
I desire
not to 'desire' it
yet the people of their own accord
are become as
simple as un-hewn logs."

To
truly lead with fairness

You must put aside control

Abandon imposition

Make spontaneity your goal

The
more you try to run their lives

With rules and prohibition

The poorer people's lives become

The more they live in opposition

The
more you deal with others

With cunning and with guile

The more that other people say

Our lives are not worthwhile

The
more you hoard your treasures

The more you're giving hope to thieves

The more you sharpen weapons

The more the country grieves

Do
nothing and see all is done

And everyone is true

Drop the rules and people owe

Prosperity to you

Just
let go of all desire

And people will return

To natural and simple ways

To life without concern

You govern a kingdom by normal rules;

You fight a war by exceptional moves;

But you win the world by letting alone.

How do I know that this is so?

By what is within me!

The more taboos and inhibitions there are in the world,

The poorer the people become.

The sharper the weapons the people possess,

The greater confusion reigns in the realm.

The more clever and crafty the men,

The oftener strange things happen.

The more articulate the laws and ordinances,

The more robbers and thieves arise.

Therefore, the Sage says:

I do not make any fuss, and the people transform themselves.

I love quietude, and the people settle down in their regular grooves.

I do not engage myself in anything, and the people grow rich.

I have no desires, and the people return to Simplicity.

Rule the kingdom with justice. Use surprise tactics to fight a war.

But it takes letting go to win and hold the world.

How do I know it is so? Through this: -

The more restrictive the laws in the kingdom, the poorer the people will be.

The more sharp weapons the people have, the more troubled and chaotic the state will be

and the less secure the people will be.

The more clever and advanced the people, the stranger the contrivances they will invent.

Law after law promulgates robbers and thieves.

Therefore the Master says: "I will let go of the law,

and the people will act rightly of their own accord,

I will love tranquility and the people will act with righteousness."

"I will make no effort, and the people will prosper.

I will let go of all of my desires, and the people will return to native simplicity."

Govern your country with integrity,

Weapons of war can be used with great cunning,

but loyalty is only won by not-doing.

How do I know the way things are?

By these:

The
more prohibitions you make,

the poorer people will be.

The more weapons you posses,

the greater the chaos in your country.

The more knowledge that is acquired,

the stranger the world will become.

The more laws that you make,

the greater the number of criminals.

Therefore
the Master says:

I do nothing,

and people become good by themselves.

I seek peace,

and people take care of their own problems.

I do not meddle in their personal lives,

and the people become prosperous.

I let go of all my desires,

and the people return to the Uncarved Block.

Run an honest, open group. Your job is to facilitate and illuminate what is happening. Interfere as little as possible. Interference, however brilliant, creates a dependency on the leader.

The fewer the rules the better. Rules reduce freedom and responsibility. Enforcement of rules is coercive and manipulative, which diminishes spontaneity and absorbs group energy.

The more coercive you are, the more resistant the group will become. Your manipulations will only breed evasions. Every law creates an outlaw. This is no way to run a group.

The wise leader establishes a clear and wholesome climate in the group room. In the light of awareness, the group naturally acts in a wholesome manner.

When the leader practices silence, the group remains focused. When the leader does not impose rules, the group discovers its own goodness. When the leader acts unselfishly, the group simply does what is to be done.

Good leadership consists of doing less and being more.

As a leader, lead properly.

Don't resort to force in the usua ways.

Win the World by "not-doing."

How do I know to do this?

Listen, the more laws and prohibitions there are

The poorer the people become.

The more dreadfu weapons you have

The more chaotic the state of the nation.

The more clever and advanced your knowledge

The stranger things become.

The more commandments and regulations you have

The more thieves there are.

Therefore the Sage who leads says:

"I practice "not-doing" and the people transform themselves.

I enjoy peace and the people correct themselves.

I stay out of their business affairs and the people prosper.

I have no desires and the people, All by themselves,

become simple and honest."

Govern
a nation with fairness.

In war do the unexpected.

Lead the nation by becoming one with it.

Why
do I say this?

Because:

The
more rules and regulations,

the more oppressed the citizens.

The more energy used to develop weapons,

the more tension in the land.

The more clever and manipulative the leaders

become,

the more agitated and unpredictable

the population.

The more religious morals and restrictions,

the more depression and self-hatred

manifests.

Therefore,

when the ruler is at one with the population

she says:

I take no action and the citizens

govern themselves.

I flow in peace and harmony

and the people follow in my footsteps.

I refuse to manipulate and control

and the population becomes predictable.

I ignore religion

and tolerance replaces judgment.

Govern the country honestly, wage war by deceit.

Do without affairs to gain the world.

How do I know this is so ?

By this.

There is much fear and superstition in the world, and people are very poor.

There is much to gain, and politicians thrive in the confusion.

Clever people develop strange and unusual things.

Law and Order makes a great showing, while thieves and robbers abound.

Thus the wise man says;

If I do nothing, people will reform themselves.

If I keep quiet, people will correct themselves.

If I do not interfere, people will better themselves.

If I have nothing to gain, people will become honest.

Rule the state with integrity.

Wage war1 with cunning strategy;

But win the empire through non-action.

How do I know this?

By this:

The more rules and regulations there are,

the more poor the people become.

The more sharp weapons there are,

the more troubled the state becomes.

The more clever the people become,

the more cunning will their actions become.

The more that law and order is promoted,

the more thieves and robbers there will be.

Therefore the Sage says:

I do not act and the people transform themselves.

I love tranquillity and the people rectifythemselves.

I do nothing and the people prosper by themselves.

I have no desires and the people become like an uncarved block, returning to simplicity by themselves.

1. presumably, 'Only when there is no other way.' (31b)

A nation should be governed with simplicity.

A war should be directed with sophistication.

The world should be won without any action.

Why should I think that?

Here are the reasons:

The more prohibitions there are,

The poorer people are;

The more weapons there are,

The more confused the social order is;

The more skills and tricks there are,

The more confusing machines are invented;

The more laws there are,

The more thieves there can appear.

That is why the wise would say:

"I stay idle, and the world will be naturally changed;

I stay quiet, and the world will be naturally restrained;

I do nothing, and the world will be naturally provided;

I desire nothing, and the world will be naturally simplified."

"Rule the kingdom by the norm wage war by the unexpected." Take over the world by Not Working. How do I know it is so? By this.

In the world: The more rules and restrictions there are the poorer the people will be. The people: The more 'sharp weapons' they have, the more disordered the state and the clans will be.

Men: The more clever and skillful they are, the more weird things will start to happen. The more you publicize rules and laws, the more robbers and thieves you will have.

Yes, the Wise Person says: I Do Nothing, and the people transform themselves. I love Stillness, and the people bring themselves to correctness.

I do No Work, and the people enrich themselves. I have no desires, and the people by themselves become Simple.

From Tao originate calm, harmony, and justice.

Yet among people, there are selfishness, cunning, falsity, violence...

Yet one can enter Tao only through non-doing.

When people aspire to accumulation of multitude of unnecessary things, they become poor spiritually.

When they produce too much weapon, then unavoidably robbery and disorder arise.

When crafty masters direct all their efforts at creating material values, then miraculous phenomena cease to happen in the country.

When laws and repressions become too strict, then grow the number of unsatisfied people and their opposition.

This is why the wise abandons vanity and let everything happen by itself.

One has to begin changes with himself. I aspire to quietness and calm — and others will be calm observing me. I do not aspire to possessing many material boons — and people around me begin to be satisfied with little. I live without worldly attachments and passions — and people around me come to simplicity and naturalness of life.

A country follows justice by a just code of laws.

A war is won by advanced knowledge of tactics.

A strong will makes a wish fulfilled.

Too
many laws attract crimes,

Too much preparation for the war, brings war,

The multitude of wishes brings conflicts amongst people.

That is why the Wise One says:

"Don't have too many laws

And the people will govern themselves.

Think of peace and the people won't suffer.

Live a simple life and people will live in harmony."

Govern
the kingdom with uprightness. Use weapons of war with guile. Take the world
by means of non-doing. How do I know the way it is? By this: If there are many
prohibitions in the world, then the people will become even poorer. If the people
have many sharp weapons then the kingdom will become even more chaotic. If the
people have many tricks then abnormal things will abound. If laws and commandments
proliferate, then there will be large numbers of bandits and robbers. So the
Sage says: I do nothing and the people transform of their own accord. I like
tranquility and the people rectify themselves. I do not (have things to do =)
meddle and the people themselves prosper. I have no desires and the people themselves
come to the state of the Uncarved Block.

Rule the state with rectitude.

Direct the army with trickery.

Capture the world through inactivity.

How can I know it shall be so?

By this:

When the world is full of taboos and prohibitions,

The people will become very poor.

When the people possess many sharp weapons,

The nation will become more chaotic.

When the people possess much craftiness,

Trickery will flourish.

When law and order become more conspicuous,

There will be more robbers and thieves.

Therefore the Sage says:

I do not act and the people reform themselves;

I love serenity and the people rectify themselves;

I employ inactivity and the people become prosperous themselves;

I have no desires and the people become simple by themselves.

The Power in Effortlessness

Lead the organization with correctness.

Direct the military with surprise tactics.

Take hold of the world with effortlessness.

How do I know it is so?

Through this:

Too many prohibitions in the world,

And people become insufficient.

Too many sharp weapons among people,

And the nation grows confused.

Too much cunning strategy among people,

And strange things start to happen.

Too obvious a growth in laws and regulations,

And too many criminals emerge.

Thus Evolved Individuals say:

Look to nonaction,

And people will be naturally influenced.

Look to refined tranquillity,

And peopel will be naturally correct.

Look to effortlessness,

And people will be naturally affluent.

Look to nondesire,

And people will be naturally simple.

Lead by not leading. Do not script laws and concepts. Rid yourself of weapons and fears. Let go of desire and stop valuing items. Your belly will be full and the grass will be green.

"Govern the realm by the right,

And battles by stratagem."

The
world is won by refraining.

How do I know this is so?

By this:

As
taboos increase, people grow poorer;

When weapons abound, the state grows chaotic;

Where skills multiply, novelties flourish;

As statutes increase, more criminals start.

So
the Wise Man will say:

As
I refrain, the people will reform:

Since I like quiet, they will keep order;

When I forebear, the people will prosper;

When I want nothing, they will be honest.

A state should be governed in a natural way,

A war should be prosecuted in an unusual way,

And the kingdom should be controlled by doing nothing.

How do I know that it is so?

On the grounds:

In the kingdom the more prohibitive enactments there are, the poorer the people become;

The more weapons the people have, the greater disorder the state and clan fall into;

The more crafts and technics men possess, the more strange contrivances appear;

The more display of statutes there is, the more robbers and thieves there are.

So the sage said:

"I do nothing, then the people submit spontaneously,

I am fond of keeping still, then the people are righteous spontaneously,

I take no trouble, and the people naturally enrich themselves,

I have no desires, then the people naturally remain in primitive simplicity."

If one governs the state with governance, he will use the military with perversity.

It is by tending to matters without conscious purpose that one takes all under Heaven as his charge.

How do I know that this is so?

It is by this:

The more all under Heaven are beset with taboos and prohibitions, the poorer the common folk grow.

The more the common folk are beset with sharp instruments, the more muddled the state becomes.

The more people have skill and cleverness, the more often perverse [ji] things will happen.

The more laws and ordinances are displayed, the more thieves and robbers there will be.

Thus the sage says:

I engage in no conscious effort, and the common folk undergo moral transformation spontaneously.

I love quietude, and the common folk govern themselves.

I tend to matters without conscious purpose, and the common folk enrich themselves.

I am utterly free of desire, and the common folk achieve pristine simplicity by themselves.

1. Use the upright and correct to order the state;

2. Use surprise tactics when you use troops;

3. Use unconcern with affairs to take control of the world.

4.
How do I know that this is so?

5. Well, the more taboos and prohibitions there are in the world, the poorer
the people will be;

6. The more sharp weapons the people possess, the more muddled the states will
be;

7. The more knowledge and skill people have, the more novel things will appear;

8. The more legal matters are made prominent, the more robbers and thieves there
will be.

9.
Therefore, the words of the Sage say:

10. I do nothing, and the people of themselves are transformed;

11. I love tranquility, and the people of themselves are upright;

12. I'm unconcerned with affairs, and the people of themselves become rich.

13. I desire not to desire, and the people of themselves are [genuine and simple,
like] uncarved wood.

You can run
a country

by sticking to principles,

and you can win a war

with strategy and tactics.

But you can gain the entire world

by doing nothing at all.

How do I know
this?

I've seen it happen:

The more restrictions

a nation imposes,

the poorer its people become.

When a nation hoards weapons,

troubles arise from within

and from without.

When its leaders try

to be cunning and clever,

the situation spins

further out of control.

When they try to fix things

by passing more laws,

they only increase the number of outlaws.

A wise leader
says to himself:

"I do nothing,

and people transform themselves.

I keep silent,

and they do the right thing

on their own.

I stay out of the way,

and they prosper.

I want for nothing,

and they lead simple lives."

.

Love Peace

States are governed by justice.

Wars are waged by violations.

The world is mastered by nonintervention.

How do I know this? By this:

The more restrictions there are, the poorer the people.

The more sharp weapons, the more trouble in the state.

The more clever cunning, the more contrivances.

The more rules and regulations, the more thieves and robbers.

Therefore the wise say,

"Do not interfere, and people transform themselves.

Love peace, and people do what is right.

Do not intervene, and people prosper.

Have no desires, and people live simply."

Honesty governs the empire Cleverness overcomes without weapons Wisdom prevails through non-action.

How do I know this? Because this is how it is:

The more administrations and prohibitions there are the more force and poverty.

The more force and weapons there are the more unrest and resistance.

The more cunning and calculation there are the more craftiness and setbacks.

The more orders are given the more foes of order there are.

Hence the Sage speaks:

I practice non-action and the people do what is right of themselves.

I practice silence and the people calm down.

I practice non-interference and the people attain prosperity.

I practice gentleness and patience and the people attain harmony and simplicity.

The Art of Government

Lao Tze says,

A state may be ruled by measures of justice;

the military force may be handled with tactics of surprise;

but the world is kept in peace by freedom from action and purpose.

How do I know that is so?

Through these:

In the world the multiplication of prohibitive enactments increases the poverty of the people.

The more assertions are put into influencing the people's thinking, the greater chaos there is in the state.

The more acts of crafty dexterity men possess, the more cunning things are produced.

The larger the number of statues displayed, the more thieves and robbers there are.

That is why a sage has said,

'I will do by acting without intent to control fate, and the people will be transformed of themselves.

I will be fond of keeping still, and the people will be righteous of themselves.

I will take no trouble about it, and the people will become rich of themselves.

I have no desire, and the people will strive for the pristine simplicity of themselves.'

SIMPLIFICATION

With
natural justice, people must be ruled,

and if war be waged, strategy and tactics used.

To master one's self,

one must act without cunning.

The
greater the number of laws and restrictions,

the poorer the people who inhabit the land.

The sharper the weapons of battle and war,

the greater the troubles besetting the land.

The greater the cunning with which people are ruled,

the stranger the things which occur in the land.

The harder the rules and regulations,

the greater the number of those who will steal.

The
sage therefore does not contrive,

in order to bring about reform,

but teaches the people peace of mind,

in order that they might enjoy their lives.

Having no desires, all he does is natural.

Since he teaches self-sufficiency,

the people who follow him return

to a good, uncomplicated life.

If you want to be a great leader,

you must learn to follow the Tao.

Stop trying to control.

Let go of fixed plans and concepts,

and the world will govern itself.

The more prohibitions you have,

the less virtuous people will be.

The more weapons you have,

the less secure people will be.

The more subsidies you have,

the less self-reliant people will be.

Therefore the Master says:

I let go of the law,

and people become honest.

I let go of economics,

and people become prosperous.

I let go of religion,

and people become serene.

I let go of all desire for the common good,

and the good becomes common as grass.

By positive policy rule the kingdom, by negative strategy conduct the war and by unselfish design lead the world.

How do we know that is so?

By this:

Where there were more taboos and inhibitions in the country, the general public was getting poorer and poorer.

Where there were more new tools and techniques in the hands of certain people, there were more confusions and injustices in the government.

The more laws and decrees were issued, the more robbers and crooks were propagated.

Thus a Sage ruler said:

"If I do not interfere, the people will cultivate themselves naturally.

If I love to be inactive, the people will govern themselves automatically.

If I do not look for display, the people will enrich themselves automatically.

If I have no excessive desires, the people will return themselves to the Pure Matter naturally.

If I have no emotional needs, the people will tranquilize themselves automatically."

Using the right lawfulness to govern the country.

Using unexpectancy to conduct the battle.

Using disengagement to take over the world.

How do I know this is so?

Thus.

The more prohibitions there are in the world, the poorer people will be.

The more destructive weapons people have, the more chaotic the nation will become.

The more know-how people have, the more bizarre things will appear.

The more rules and demands that flourish, the more thefts there will be.

Therefore the sage says:

When I am inactive, people transform themselves.

When I abide in stillness, people organize themselves lawfully.

When I am disengaged, people enrich themselves.

When I choose nondesire, people remain simple.

LVII

It
has been said of good leaders

'Peace is won by doing the expected, war by doing the unexpected'

But to lead by following the way you must let expectations go

Prohibitions
only protect one by depriving another

Weapons only defend one by assaulting another

No amount of knowledge will ever substitute for wisdom

No amount of laws can ever replace honor

When
you lead by following the way, remember

If you do nothing, people will transform themselves

If you remain quiet, people will have nothing to be confused about

Don't play the angles, and prosperity will be the norm

Don't impose your desires, and no one will conform or rebel

Govern Nations by Normalcy

Use straightforwardness for civil government,

use surprise for military operations;

use noninvolvement to take the world.

How do I know this?

The more taboos there are in the world,

the poorer the populace is;

the more crafts the people have

the more exotic things are produced;

the more laws are promulgated,

the greater the number of thieves.

Therefore the sage says,

I contrive nothing,

and the people are naturally civilized;

I am fond of tranquility,

and the people are naturally upright.

I have nothing to do,

and the people are naturally enriched;

I have no desire,

and the people are naturally simple.

Govern the kingdom by the normal way.

Fight the battle by the unexpected way.

And one can win the world without using force.

How do I know this is so?

By the following:

When there are too many restrictions and regulations, people become poor.

When there are too many weapons, the kingdom is in disarray.

When there are too many tricks, bizarre things happen.

When there are too many decrees, the crime rate increases.

This is why the sage says:

"I do not force my way, and people live peacefully.

I keep quiet, and people live normally.

I do not interfere, and people become rich.

I do not covet anything, and people would be honest."

You govern a state by straightness.

You engage in war by rare operations.

It is by non-doing that you win the world.

How do I know that this is so?

By the fact it is so.

The more restrictions and inhibitions there are in the world, the poorer the people become.

The sharper the weapons the people possess, the more disordered the nation is.

The more skills the people have, the more strange things happen.

The more articulate the laws and rules, the more thieves and robbers there are.

Therefore, the sage says:

I do not do, and the people transform themselves.

I love quietude, and the people become straight by themselves.

I do not engage myself in anything, and the people grow rich by themselves.

I have no desires, and the people return to simplicity.

Rule a nation with justice.

Wage war with deception.

Become ruler of the world with peace.

How do I know that this is so?

Because of these.

The more laws and restrictions,

the poorer people become.

The sharper men's weapons,

the more trouble in the land.

The more ingenious and clever men,

the more strange things happen.

The more rules and regulations,

the more thieve and robbers.

Therefore, the sage says: I Wu-Wei,

people will rule themselves.

I enjoy peace and people become honest.

I do nothing special (such as tax and war) and people become rich.

I have no unjust desires (concubines, conquering, etc.),

people return to the good and simple life.

Govern the country by being straightforward.

Wage war by being crafty.

Win all under heaven by not meddling.

How
do I know that this is so?

By what is within me.

The
more restrictions there are,

the poorer are the people.

The more pointed the people's weapons,

the more disorder there is in the country.

The more ingenious and clever the people,

the more strange the contrivances that appear.

The more laws and edicts that are posted,

the more thieves and robbers that arise.

Hence
an Old One has said:

I act without striving and the

people transform themselvey.

I love stillness and the

people straighten themselves.

I do not meddle and the

people prosper by themselves.

I am free from desires and the

people themselves return to the simplicily

of the Uncarved Block.

Order
is only maintained through law and justice.

Battles are only won by ignoring rules and propriety.

But the universe can only be understood by

letting-go

leaving-alone.

How do I know?

Because ...

the more restrictions placed on people,

the more people will evade them, the poorer the people become.

The more weapons, the smarter people become,

the darker the land becomes.

The greater the science,

the deadlier the inventions.

The more laws,

the more criminals and jails.

Therefore,
I do nothing,

and people are naturally transformed.

I love peace and quiet,

and people naturally become better.

I do nothing,

and people have more than enough.

I want nothing, and people naturally return to

the simple life.

Kingdoms can only be governed if rules are kept; rule a kingdom by some normal
standards and with utmost discretion.

Battles, on the other hand, can be won if rules are aptly broken. Operate the
army and fight some battles by (unusual) tactics of surprise and attack.

Yet administer the kingdom by engaging in no activity. Win the world by doing
next to nothing, for major adherence can only be won by letting well alone.

How do I know this will be so? By this:

The more prohibitions, ritual avoidances, and taboos there are, the poorer the
people will end.

The more 'sharp weapons' there are, the more troubled and chaotic the state
will be, and the more benighted the whole land will grow.

The more cunning craftsmen there are, the more skills of technique, the more
vicious things will appear: the more pernicious contrivances will be invented.

The more laws are promulgated, the more thieves and bandits there will be. So:
The greater the number of statutes, the greater the number of thieves in the
end.

So a wise man decreed:

So long as I "do nothing" the people get transformed of themselves.

So long as I love quietude, the people will of themselves go straight.

So long as I act only by proper inactivity the people will of themselves grow
rich.

I have no desires, and the people of themselves become simple as the mythological
raw block'.

Rule the state with uprightness,

Deploy your troops with craft,

Gain all under heaven with noninterference.

How do I know this is actually so?

Now,

The more taboos under heaven, the poorer the people;

The more clever devices people have, the more confused the state and ruling house;

The more knowledge people have, the more strange things spring up;

The more legal affairs are given prominence, the more numerous bandits and thieves.

For this reason,

The sage has a saying:

"I take no action, yet the people transform themselves;

I am fond of stillness, yet the people correct themselves;

I do not interfere in affairs, yet the people enrich themselves;

I desire not to desire, yet the people of themselves become simple as unhewn logs."

The righteous man may rule the nation.

The strategic man may rule the army.

But the man who refrains from active measures should be the king.

How do I know this:-

When the actions of the people are controlled by prohibited laws, the country becomes more and more impoverished.

When the people are allowed the free use of arms, the Government is in danger.

The more crafty and dexterous the people become, the more do artificial things come into use.

And when those cunning arts are publicly esteemed, then do rogues prosper.

Therefore the wise man says:-

I will design nothing: and the people will shape themselves.

I will keep quiet; and the people will find their rest.

I will not assert myself; and the people will come forth.

I will discountenance ambition; and the people will revert to their natural simplicity.

Forget Rules

If you create ''rules for our relationship"

you will blame each other for breaking them.

If you develop lofty goals and plans,

you will always struggle to achieve them.

If you strive continually for perfection,

you will always be dissatisfied.

Forget rules

and you will naturally do

what is best for your beloved.

Forget goals and plans

and your life together will thrive.

Forget perfection

and you will be perfect.

Goals, plans and efforts

are not necessarily bad.

But remember that you already

have everything you need.

Let a touch, a kiss, and an embrace

be your reminders.

Govern the state with correctness. Operate the army with surprise
tactics. Administer the empire by engaging in no activity. How do I know
that this should be so? Through this:

The more taboos and prohibitions there are in the world, The poorer
the people will be. The more sharp weapons the people have, The more
troubled the state will be.

The more cunning and skill a man possesses, The more vicious things
will appear. The more laws and orders are made prominent, The more
thieves and robbers there will be.

Therefore the sage says: I take no action and the people of themselves
are transformed. I love tranquillity and the people of themselves
become correct.

I engage in no activity and the people of themselves become
prosperous. I have no desires and the people of themselves become
simple.

A realm is governed
by ordinary acts,

A battle is governed by extraordinary acts;

The world is governed by no acts at all.

And how do I know?

This is how I know.

Act after act prohibits

Everything but poverty,

Weapon after weapon conquers

Everything but chaos,

Business after business provides

A craze of waste,

Law after law breeds

A multitude of thieves.

Therefore a sensible man says:

If I keep from meddling with people, they take care of themselves,

If I keep from commanding people, they behave themselves,

If I keep from preaching at people, they improve themselves,

If I keep from imposing on people, they become themselves.

When governing a country you must be fair and just;

When fighting a battle, you must use tricks;

When taking over the world, you must practice WUWEI.

How do I know everything in this world? This is how.

The more restrictions the government sets, the more people become poor;

The more people have dangerous weapons, the more the country falls into chaos;

The more people become clever, the more bizarre things happen;

The more severe the law becomes, the more thieves there are.

So the great men said: "If I practice WUWEI, the people will govern themselves;

If I am always peaceful, the people will be upright by themselves;

If I do not initiate things for my own purposes, the people will become rich by themselves;

If I do not have desires, the people will become simple and plain by themselves."

Govern a nation with enduring justice.

Command troops with unpredictable moves.

Lead the world with empowering noninterference.

How do I know this to be so?

From witnessing the following:

The more restrictions there are in the world, the poorer people become.

The more weapons people possess, the darker nations become.

The more cunning and cleverness there is, the more there are anomalous things.

The more rules and regulations there are, the more there are thieves and robbers.

Therefore the sage says:

I take no action, and people are naturally transformed.

I delight in stillness, and people naturally do what is right.

I do not interfere, and people on their own prosper.

I have no greed, and people on their own return to simplicity.

A nation should be governed with simplicity.

A war should be directed with sophistication.

The world should be won without any action.

Why should I think that?

Here are the reasons:

The more prohibitions there are,

The poorer people are;

The more weapons there are,

The more confused the social order is;

The more skills and tricks there are,

The more confusing machines are invented;

The more laws there are,

The more thieves there can appear.

That is why the wise would say:

"I stay idle, and the world will be naturally changed;

I stay quiet, and the world will be naturally restrained;

I do nothing, and the world will be naturally provided;

I desire nothing, and the world will be naturally simplified."

Rule the kingdom with justice. Use surprise tactics to fight a war.

But it takes letting go to win and hold the world.

How do I know it is so? Through this: -

The more restrictive the laws in the kingdom, the poorer the people will be.

The more sharp weapons the people have, the more troubled and chaotic the state will be

and the less secure the people will be.

The more clever and advanced the people, the stranger the contrivances they will invent.

Law after law promulgates robbers and thieves.

Therefore the Master says: "I will let go of the law,

and the people will act rightly of their own accord,

I will love tranquility and the people will act with righteousness."

"I will make no effort, and the people will prosper.

I will let go of all of my desires, and the people will return to native simplicity."

