===== Chapter 71 =====

Knowing "no-knowing" is best.

Not to know [this] "knowing" is a fault.

Only those who take faults to be faults

Are therefore without fault.

The sages are without fault

For they take faults to be faults.

Only those who take faults to be faults

Are therefore without fault.

Know not-knowing: supreme. Not know knowing: faulty

Only faulting faults is faultless.

The Sage is faultless

By faulting faults,

And so is without fault.

If you know that you're ignorant you are fine.

If you don't know that you're ignorant you are flawed.

Only when you recognize your flaws

Will you become flawless.

The sage is free from flaws.

He's flawless because he knows his flaws.

STRENGTH IN KNOWLEDGE

Knowing you know not, is strength -

A high attainment.

Not knowing, yet thinking you know, is sickness -

A dire defect.

Only with knowledge of this sickness as a sickness,

Can the defect be removed.

The Sage has no sickness - no defect.

Recognizing sickness as sickness, defect as defect,

He is free from these curses.

Know not knowing.

Those above do not know knowing.

For this reason they are sick.

Sickness, use your sickness as the means to get well.

The sage is not sick, because they use the one.

Sickness, use your sickness as the means to get well.

THE DISTEMPER OF KNOWLEDGE

To know, yet to know nothing, is the highest; not to know, yet to pretend

to knowledge, is a distemper.

Painful
is this distemper; therefore we shun it. The wise man hath it

not. Knowing it to be bound up with Sorrow, he putteth it away from him.

To know and yet (think) we do not know is the highest (attainment);not to know (and yet think) we do know is a disease. It is simply by beingpained at (the thought of) having this disease that we are preserved fromit. The sage has not the disease. He knows the pain that would be inseparablefrom it, and therefore he does not have it.

Realizing you can't know anything, is wise

One who does not understand he can't know anything, is insane

One who realizes his insanity,

Is able to get rid of it

One who is wise is not insane anymore,

Because he has disposed of his insanity

Therefore he has a clear view

To know how little one knows is to have genuine knowledge. Not to know how little one knows is to be deluded.

Only he who knows when he is deluded can free himself from such delusion. The intelligent man is not deluded, because he knows and accepts his ignorance, and accepts his ignorance as ignorance, and thereby has genuine knowledge.

"To know when one does not know is best.

To think one knows when one does not know is a dire disease.

Only he who recognizes this disease as a disease

Can cure himself of the disease.

The Sage's way of curing disease

Also consists in making people recognize their diseases as diseases

And thus ceasing to be diseased.

To know that you do not know is clarity.

To think that you know is sickness.

Being sick of sickness, one attains clarity.

The sage is sick of sickness.

Therefore, he is clear.

To know without knowledge is best

To not understand knowledge is affliction

Now (it is) because afflictions afflict

That there is a way to avoid affliction

Wise ones avoid disease

Because they are made ill by illness

This is the way to avoid the disease

Sickness

To know that you do not know is best.

Not to know that you do not know is a sickness.

Therefore the Sage is not sick.

The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness.

Therefore, he is not sick.

Moving from knowing to not knowing - this is good. Moving from not knowing to knowing - this is sickness. You have to become sick of your sickness before you can get rid of it.

The sage isn't sick. He's sick of his sickness. Therefore he's not sick.

Awareness of the poverty of knowledge

Is all the knowledge you need.

Repression of the awareness

Is the seed of disease.

You can remove the disease

By watching the symptoms,

And sickening their origin.

Thus the follower of the Sage:

He guards his health

By being aware of disease.

Thus he never seems sickened,

Since he feels his own pain.

Negative emotions, such as hatred, envy, pity, and contempt are the symptoms of the metaphorical disease described in this poem. The symptoms of the disease must be watched, because they lead one to the "seed of disease," which is the arrogance of knowledge, exemplified in the false and superficial ideas that comprise the one-sided vision of scholarly accumulation (see also Chapter 81). True awareness is the consciousness of the poverty of knowledge in isolation from the totality of being; to fully sense this poverty is to "feel one's own pain," without the empty and officious compassion of a politician, a guru, or some other authority. This is the "awareness of disease" that Lao Tzu reminds us to nurture within ourselves: the deep self-knowledge that comes when you are acutely aware of not-knowing. This is the path of true independence.

On Intelligence

To
know what you do not know, is best.

He
who thinks he knows what he does not know,

is sick in mind.

One
who sees this sickness for what it is,

is not sick in mind.

The
followers of Tao are not sick in mind,

because they know this.

The highest attainment is to know non-knowledge. To regard ignorance as knowledge is a disease. Only be feeling the pain of this disease do we cease to be diseased. The perfected man, because h eknows the pain of it, is free from this disease. It is for this reason that he does not have it.

Not knowing that one knows is best;

Thinking that one knows when one does not know is sickness.

Only when one becomes sick of the sickness can one be free from sickness.

The sage is never sick; because he is sick of this sickness, therefore he is not sick.

Know-how as a disease

Knowing not to know is better.

Not knowing to know is a defect.

In general, in only 'defecting' defects, using this is not to 'defect.'

Sages do not 'defect' because they 'defect' defects.

For this reason they do not 'defect.'

Knowing that which cannot be known is perfect.

Not being aware of this knowing is a defect.

To be aware of defects as defects is to be free from defects.

The wise is free from defects.

He is aware of defects as defects.

Therefore, he is free from defects.

Knowing ignorance is best.

Thinking one knows is foolish.

Only by being a fool can one avoid becoming a fool.

The sage does not think he knows, therefore he is not a fool.

Knowing as if not knowing

Is peerless;

Not knowing as if knowing

Is a sickness.

Hence, the sage man was not sick:

Being sick of the sickness,

Hence, he was not sick.

Not knowing what one knows is the best,

To think that one knows when one does not know is sick.

Only when one becomes sick of this sickness,

Is it possible to get free of the sickness.

The sage is never sick,

Since he is sick of this sickness,

He is not sick.

To know yet to think that one does not know is best;

Not to know yet to think that one knows will lead to difficulty.

It
is by being alive to difficulty that one can avoid it.

The sage meets with no difficulty.

It is because he is alive to it that he meets with no difficulty.

The Disease of Knowledge

To know the unknowable, that is elevating. Not to know the knowable, that is sickness.

Only by becoming sick of sickness can we be without sickness.

The holy man is not sick. Because he is sick of sickness, therefore he is not sick.

You can only know when there is no knowing. Thinking you know is a delusion. If you realise the delusion is your own, it can be cleared. The master has rejected all knowing, and his delusion has cleared. He is now enlightened.

Knowing that one does not know is best;

Not knowing but pretending to know is a fault.

A sage has no faults, because he/she is aware of his/her faults and works on these faults.

Because a sage is aware of faults and works on them, he/she has no faults.

Knowing not-knowing is lofty.

Not knowing not-knowing is affliction.

A sage stays free of affliction.

Just recognize it as affliction and you're free of it.

Knowing what you do not know is the best,

Pretending to know what you do not know is a disease.

Only be treating the disease as a disease,

Can one be free from it.

The sage is free from the disease

Because he treats the disease as a disease,

Therefore he is free from it.

Knowing,
lack of knowing

Better, lack of knowing

Knowing, a disease.

In
the end only when the disease is sick

Appropriate lack of the disease happens.

Sages lack the disease

It happens the disease was sick.

Appropriately
lack of the disease happens.

Knowing all and believing that one knows nothing, is true knowledge (of a superior kind). Knowing nothing and believing that one knows everything, is the common evil of humans. Seeing this evil as an evil, keeps one away from it.

The Sage is exempt from self-conceit, because he dreads it. This fear keeps him from it.

To know that you do not know is highest

To not know but think you know is flawed

Only when one recognizes the fault as a fault

Can one be without fault

The sages are without fault

Because they recognize the fault as a fault

That is why they are without fault

To know that you do not know - to recognize your own ignorance - is best, because it motivates you to continue seeking answers and keeps you from becoming presumptuous and arrogant.

The opposite of this is to be ignorant but assume that you possess knowledge. This is a flaw that many of us have. It even seems like the less you know, the more you think you know.

It is only when we see a problem clearly, and recognize that we need to do something about it, that we can begin taking steps to remove it and eventually be without it.

The sages are human too, and make mistakes just like everyone else. What makes them different is that they look at themselves with the clarity of detachment, whereas most of us are blind to our own faults.

Because they are naturally humble, sages do not automatically assume they must be correct. When they recognize that they have made a mistake or manifested a problem, they take active steps to address the issue.

People who know that they do not know and take steps to learn will eventually acquire the knowledge they need. Similarly, sages who monitor themselves, recognize their own faults and take steps to correct themselves will ultimately be free of the faults.

Notes

The Chinese character bing occurs eight times in this chapter. Many translators translate it as "disease" or "illness." This is the dictionary definition as well as the common, modern usage, but in this case it doesn't quite fit. Being sick comes close to the original meaning but doesn't really hit the mark.

When Lao Tzu uses bing, he is specifically referencing human errors and character flaws - being sick or defective in some aspect of one's thinking. This context still exists in modern Chinese. For instance, when we say mao bing, we are talking specifically about a fault or a problem.

Plug "disease" into the translation and interpretation above and the chapter will seem a bit strange. Use "problem" or "fault" instead for bing and suddenly it will seem as if a veil has been lifted, and the meaning of the chapter becomes crystal clear.

This particular issue makes this chapter a good test of translation quality. If your translation renders bing in the context of disease or illness, it may be a sign that the translator knows modern Chinese but not ancient Chinese.

THE DISEASE OF KNOWLEDGE

To recognize one's ignorance of unknowable things is mental health, and to be ignorant of knowable things is sickness. Only by grieving over ignorance of knowable things are we in mental health. The wise man is wise because he understands his ignorance and is grieved over it.

From knowing to not knowing (chih, pu chih),

This is superior.

From not knowing to knowing (pu chih, chih),

This is sickness.

It is by being sick of sickness,

That one is not sick.

The sage is not sick.

Because he is sick of sickness,

Therefore he is not sick.

On Intelligence

To know what you do not know is best. He who thinks he knows what he does not know is sick in mind.

One who sees this for what it is is not sick in mind.

The followers of Tao are not sick in mind because they know this.

To know that you do not know is strength.

Not knowing that you do not know is a sickness.

The cure begins with the recognition of the sickness.

The Tao–Master is not sick, but he is sick of sickness.

Thus, he is well.

Seventy-one

Knowing ignorance is strength.

Ignoring knowledge is sickness.

If one is sick of sickness, then one is not sick.

The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness.

Therefore he is not sick.

Knowing one's ignorance of certain knowledge is the best attitude;

Not knowing certain knowledge yet pretending to know is a bad attitude.

The sage is of no shortcoming,

Because he considers shortcoming as shortcoming.

He considers shortcoming as shortcoming,

Thus he has no shortcoming.

To know yet not to know is best;

Not to know yet to know is a disease.

Truly, when you recognize a disease as a disease,

You are free of disease.

The sage is free of disease.

Because he recognizes a disease as a disease,

He is free of disease.

Knowing but thinking you do not really know, you are a man of great virtue.

Not knowing but thinking that you know, you have a severe affliction.

Because you are aware of this fault, you can then try to avoid committing this mistake.

The sage has no flaws because he is cognizant of this malady.

Hence, he has no shortcomings.

Knowing the Disease

Chih Ping

He who knows what he does not know is superior.

He who does not know what he knows is diseased.

Only when a disease is recognized as a disease

Can the disease cease to be disease.

The Sage is free from disease;

He recognizes a disease as a disease,

Therefore he is free from disease.

To know that one does not know is the better part.

Not to recognize true knowledge is an illness.

Only by knowing this illness to be illness does not cease to be ill.

The Sage is free from this illness;

For having recognized his illness and illness,

He is no longer ill.

To know and to be unknowing is best;

Not to know and to be knowing is sickness.

Only by being sick of our sickness

Are we not sick.

The sage is not sick.

He is sick of sickness

And therefore not sick.

He who regards his intellectual knowledge as ignorance has deep insight.

He who overrates his intellectual achievement as definite truth is deeply sick.

Only when one is sick of this sickness can one cease to be sick.

One who returns his mind to the simplicity of the subtle truth is not sick.

He knows to break through conceptual knowledge in order to directly reach the subtle truth of the universe.

This is the foundation of his health!

LXXI.

Knowledge
and Its Sickness

To
know the not-known, this is something high,

And
not to know the known is sick to be,

To be
sick of sickness sickness will dispel,

To be
sick of ignorance will make us well,

Thereby,
the sage from ignorance is free.

To know that we are ignorant is a high attainment.

To be ignorant and to think we know is a defect.

The Master indeed can cure this defect.

That is why he has not this defect.

The self-controlled man has not this defect,

He takes hold of his defect and cures it.

That is why he has not this defect.

To understand

that our knowledge

is not complete,

This

is a great

understanding.

To think

about our innocence

as knowledge,

This

is mental sickness.

Only when

we are sick

of our sickness

Shall we cease

to be sick.

The Complete Thinker

is not sick,

being sick of sickness;

This

is the secret

of health.

Not to regard knowing as knowing is the highest.

To regard not-knowing as knowing is a sickness.

Indeed, it is only by being sick of that sickness that one is not sick.

The Saint is not sick, because he is sick of that sickness.

Therefore he is not sick.

To know and yet (think) we do not know is the highest

(attainment); not to know (and yet think) we do know is a disease.

It
is simply by being pained at (the thought of) having this

disease that we are preserved from it. The sage has not the disease.

He knows the pain that would be inseparable from it, and therefore he

does not have it.

To
realize that you do not understand is a virtue;
NOT to realize it is something
of a defect.
The
reason Sages have no such defects (LEFT!,)
is because they treat defects
AS defects..
and
thus they have none left.

You
cannot understand the truth

Claim to know and show you're ill

Just see that you are missing

That truth is bare and nil

Unknowing
is the final cure

When knowledge takes its heavy toll

Pure presence is totality

And absence makes you whole

To realize that our knowledge is ignorance,

This is a noble insight.

To regard our ignorance as knowledge,

This is mental sickness.

Only when we are sick of our sickness

Shall we cease to be sick.

The Sage is not sick, being sick of sickness;

This is the secret of health.

To know that you do not know is the wisest and healthiest thing.

To think you know when you do not can be likened to an illness.

First you must rid yourself of the thought that you know, and then you are on the way to healing.

The sage does not have this sickness, he realizes that he does not know; therefore his sickness has vanished.

Knowing you don't know is wholeness.

Thinking you know is a disease.

Only by recognizing that you have an illness

can you move to seek a cure.

The
Master is whole because

she sees her illnesses and treats them,

and thus is able to remain whole.

Nobody has all the answers. Knowing that you do not know everything is far wiser than thinking that you know a lot when you really don't.

Phony expertise is neurotic. Fortunately, once the symptoms are recognized, the sure is easy: stop it.

Probably every leader has tried this form of pretense at one time or another.

The wise leader has learned how painful it is to fake knowledge. Being wise and not wanting the pain; the leader does no indulge in pretending.

Anyway, it is a relief to be able to say: "I don't know."

She who knows that she does not know is the best off.

He who pretends to know but doesn't is ill.

Only someone who realizes he is ill can become whole.

The sage is not il because she recognizes this illness as illness,

Therefore she is not ill.

Acknowledging
oneness manifests peace.

Acknowledging distinctions manifests confusion.

If
one is in harmony with disharmony,

then one is at peace.

The sage is at peace because she is

not confused with the distinctions of

harmony and disharmony.

The
sage is at one with Infinity.

Understanding without Knowledge is Transcendence.

Knowledge without Understanding is an affliction.

Only by recognizing the affliction, are you not afflicted.

The Wise Man is not afflicted,

because he recognizes the affliction.

Thus he is not afflicted

To know that you do not know, this is best.

Not to know, whilst thinking that one does know, this is to be flawed.

Recognising this defect as a defect

Is the way to be free of the defect.

The Sage is not flawed

Because he recognises the flaw as a flaw.

Therefore he is flawless.1

1. I follow Henricks (1990, 168) who remarks, 'Although ping [in this chapter] does mean "disease" ... here it is best translated, I feel, as "flaw" (or "fault" or "defect").'

The best knower knows how to know.

The worst knower knows that he/she knows.

The wise person knows how poor knowers stray

And can therefore keep himself/herself on the right path.

"Aware but not aware of it: a high thing." Not aware but aware of it: sick of this. Simply sick of the sickness - and so no longer sick.

The Wise Person's lack of this sickness: He became sick of being sick, and so he's no longer sick.

He who possesses knowledge and keeps silence about it is honorable.

He who has no knowledge yet pretends to be knowing... is not healthy.

He who is wise heals himself. The wise never falls ill because he rids himself of the causes of illness. He abides in Tao. How can he be ill then?

Knowing our limits is wisdom,

Not knowing our limits is ignorance.

The Wise One knows his limits,

Thus he knows always what is possible to be done.

To
know that you do not know is the best. To not know that you {do not} know is
a defect. Now only by treating defect as defect can you be without defect. The
Sage is without defect because he treats [all] defects as defects and so is
without defect.

He who knows that he does not know is the best.

He who does not know but pretends to know is sick.

He who realizes the sickness is sickness

Doesn't have any sickness.

The Sage is without sickness

Because he realizes the sickness is sickness.

Therefore, he doesn't have any sickness.

Knowing the Disease

To know that you do not know is best.

To not know of knowing is a disease.

Indeed, to be sick of the disease,

Is the way to be free of the disease.

Evolved Individuals are free of the disease,

Because they are sick of the disease.

This is the way to be free of disease.

True knowledge is not from a book or even from a wise sage. These are all illusions. Destroy your illusions and don't know. Then you will be whole.

To know that you are ignorant is best;

To know what you do not, is a disease;

But if you recognize the malady

Of mind for what it is, then that is health.

The
Wise Man has indeed a healthy mind;

He sees an aberration as it is

And for that reason never will be ill.

It is the best for one to know that he does not know;

It is an illness to pretend to know when he actually does not know.

Recognizing the illness as an illness prevents one from the illness.

The sage is free from the illness,

Because he recognizes the illness as an illness.

He can prevent the illness thereby.

To regard not knowing as knowing is the highest;

not to regard knowing as knowing is harmful.

It is only by regarding harm as harm that one suffers no harm.

That the sage suffers no harm is because he regards harm as harm, and this is why he suffers no harm.

1. To know you don't know is best.

2. Not to know you [don't] know is a flaw.

3. Therefore, the Sage's not being flawed

4. Stems from his recognizing a flaw as a flaw.

5. Therefore, he is flawless.

If you know

what you don't know,

you're doing great.

If you don't know

what you don't know,

you're sick.

The only way

to get rid of that sickness

is to be sick of it.

The Masters
aren't sick,

because they got sick of being sick.

.

A Disease

To know that you do not know is the best.

To think you know when you do not is a disease.

Recognizing this disease as a disease is to be free of it.

The wise are free of disease,

because they recognize the disease as a disease.

Therefore they are free of disease.

Recognizing one's ignorance is wisdom Not recognizing it and believing that one knows is sickness.

To be tired of this sickness means to be rid of it.

The Sage is free from sickness because he is tired of ignorance.

Therein lies his freedom.

Exemption From Sick-Mindedness

Lao Tze says,

To know and yet think you don't know is the highest attainment;

not to know and yet think you know is sick-minded.

It is simply in being pained at the thought of having sick-mindedness that one is free from being sick-minded.

The sage is not sick-minded because he knows the pain that would be inseparable from sick-mindedness and therefore he is totally exempted from this sick-mindedness.

WITHOUT SICKNESS

To
acknowledge one's ignorance

shows strength of personality,

but to ignore wisdom is a sign of weakness.

To
be sick of sickness is a sign of good health,

therefore the wise man grows sick of sickness,

and sick of being sick of sickness,

'til he is sick no more.

Not-knowing is true knowledge.

Presuming to know is a disease.

First realize that you are sick;

then you can move toward health.

The Master is her own physician.

She has healed herself of all knowing.

Thus she is truly whole.

One who knows the unknown is a high type of man.

One who does not know the known is at fault.

Thus a Sage was not at fault because he was aware of faults.

Knowing that you don't know (everything) is superior.

Not knowing that you don't know (everything) is a sickness.

So the sage's being without sickness is that he knows sickness as sickness;

Thus, he is without sickness.

LXXI

People
are odd

They think they know what they don't

They think they don't know what they do

Excellence does not come, however, from knowing everything or knowing nothing

But merely from knowing that you don't know

Knowing Unconciously

To know unconsciously is best.

To presume to know what you don't is sick.

Only by recognizing the sickness of sickness

is it possible not to be sick.

The sages' freedom from ills

was from recognizing the sickness of sickness,

so they didn't suffer from sickness.

Knowing what is not known is good.

Not knowing but pretending to know is bad.

Sages rarely ail, because they hate ills.

Thus, hating ills, one can be free of ills.

If we know that we do not know, this is a high insight.

If we do not know that we know, this is sickness.

When we are sick of our sickness, we will cease to be sick.

The sage is not sick.

He is sick of his sickness; thus he is not sick.

Knowing being ignorance is knowledge.

Not knowing being ignorant is sicking ignorance.

Only if one is sick of sickness,

then he could avoid to be sick.

The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness.

Therefore, he is not sick.

lt is well to know that you do not know.

To think you know when you do not is sickness.

When
you are sick of sickness you will no longer be sick.

True Persons are not sick because they are sick of sickness;

this is the way to health.

Knowing
the depths of your own ignorance is healthy.

Thinking that you know

what you really don't

is a cancer.

Only by realizing that you don't know

can you be healed.

The
way to heal this cancer

is to recognize your false knowledge

as a disease,

thereby freeing yourself

of it.

To know that you do not know is best. Who knows that he doesn't know is the
highest. To know when one doesn't know is best.

Who pretends to know what he doesn't know is sick-minded; To think one knows
when one doesn't know is a sort of malady. Pretend to know when you don't know
- that's a disease. He who recognises this disease as a disease can also cure
himself of it [and maybe not]. [One may eventually get free from a disease by
recognising it for what it is.]

Who recognises sick-mindedness as sick-mindedness can't be wholly sick-minded,
after all.

The wise man is hardly sick-minded if he recognises sick mind as sick and also
cures some diseases. He's hardly a sick mind.

To realize that you do not understand is a virtue;

Not to realize that you do not understand is a defect.

The reason why

The sage has no defects,

Is because he treats defects as defects.

Thus,

He has no defects.

To know one's ignorance is the best part of knowledge.

To be ignorant of such knowledge is a disease.

If one only regards it as a disease, he will soon be cured of it.

The wise man is exempt from this disease.

He knows it for what it is, and so is free from it.

Knowing How to Dance

Each coming together is a new dance

with a lover who knows how to lead

and how to follow.

The moods and events of life

are always changing.

Confidence in each other does not come

from the ability to predict each other's routine,

but from knowing how to dance

to whatever music plays.

Dancing is a wonderful metaphor

for a life of love together.

Shifting your pace from fast to slow,

from free-form to patterned,

from joyous to melancholy,

is the secret of success.

Sometimes you will dance alone

to different rhythms,

but never too far away.

To know that you do not know is the best. To pretend to know when you
do not know is a disease. Only when one recognizes this disease as a
disease can one be free from the disease.

The sage is free from the disease. Because he recognizes this disease to be disease, he is free from it.

A man who knows
how little he knows is well,

A man who knows how much he knows is sick.

If, when you see the symptoms, you can tell,

Your cure is quick.

A sound man knows that sickness makes him sick

And before he catches it his cure is quick.

If you have knowledge, but you feel like you do not have knowledge, this is super.

If you do not have knowledge, but you feel like you have knowledge, this is sick.

The great men were not sick because they knew what the sickness is.

Only when you know what the sickness is, will you not be sick.

Having knowledge, yet being aware of the unknown, is superior intelligence.

Not having knowledge, yet pretending to know, is intellectual stagnation.

To be aware of stagnation is to be free of it.

The sage is free of any stagnation,

because he is keenly aware of all stagnation.

Therefore, he is forever free of stagnation.

The best knower knows how to know.

The worst knower knows that he/she knows.

The wise person knows how poor knowers stray

And can therefore keep himself/herself on the right path.

To know that you do not know is the wisest and healthiest thing.

To think you know when you do not can be likened to an illness.

First you must rid yourself of the thought that you know, and then you are on the way to healing.

The sage does not have this sickness, he realizes that he does not know; therefore his sickness has vanished.

