===== Chapter 7 =====

Heaven is long-lasting; the Earth is old.

Heaven and Earth are placed

By that which can last long and be old.

Because they do not live for themselves

Is the reason they can live long.

Therefore, the sages

Put their bodies behind

And yet their bodies go forward.

Are outside their bodies

And yet their bodies exist.

Do not consider this selflessness to be wrong

For it is the reason they can complete their "selves."

Heaven is long, Earth enduring.

Long and enduring Because they do not exist for themselves.

Therefore the Sage Steps back, but is always in front, Stays outside, but is always within.

No self-interest?

Self is fulfilled?

Heaven endures, earth lasts forever.

How are they able to do so?

They do not live for themselves so they live on.

Thus the sage stays at the back

Yet finds himself at the front.

Unconcerned about himself, he survives.

Unconcerned about his goals, does he not attain them?

SOFT ACTION

The universe is everlasting.

Not existing for itself, but giving life to all,

It endures forever.

Thus, the Sage -

- Remaining behind and in the background,

Finds himself ahead and in the foreground.

- Staying detached,

Finds himself at one with all.

- Being selfless,

Attains fulfillment.

Heaven is eternal, the Earth is enduring.

There is a reason why Heaven and Earth are eternal and enduring.

It is because they do not live for themselves.

Thus, they give life everlasting.

The sage puts their own life second, and their body first.

They reject their self, and the body remains.

Surely, there is no self-interest.

Power and accomplishment are self-interest.

THE CONCEALMENT OF THE LIGHT

Heaven and Earth are mighty in continuance, because their work is

delivered from the lust of result.

Thus
also the sage, seeking not any goal, attaineth all things; he doth

not interfere in the affairs of his body, and so that body acteth without

friction. It is because he meddleth not with personal aims that these

come to pass with simplicity.

Heaven and earth endure forever. Why do Heaven and earth endure eternally?Because they live not for themselves But for eternity. So does the Sagewithdraw In order that his inner Self may advance. He loses his Self topreserve his self. Is it not that he fulfills his Being by giving up hisbeing?

The Universe is everlasting

The reason why it is everlasting

Is because it doesn't exist for itself

Therefore it can last

Therefore a wise man behaves as the least

And because he is least, he is the greatest

He is detached and therefore he is safe

Couldn't it be possible that he is perfect,

Just because he is disinterested?

The principle of initiation persists; and the principle of completion continues.

Why do such opposing principles persist? Because they inhere in Nature, rather than stand by themselves. That is why opposites endure.

The intelligent man, when an issue arises, stands off and observes both contentions.

Since he does not take sides, he never loses a battle.

By not favouring one side more than the other, he is able to appreciate the virtues of both sides.

Heaven is eternal, the Earth everlasting.

How come they to be so?

It is because they do not foster their own lives;

That is why they live so long.

Therefore the Sage

Puts himself in the background; but is always to the fore.

Remains outside; but is always there.

Is it not just because he does not strive for any personal end

That all his personal ends are fulfilled?

The realm of heaven and earth is everlasting.

Why is it everlasting?

Because it is not conscious of itself.

Having no thought of being, it never is not.

Like this, the sage forgets himself

so is always present.

Without self-concern,

the self is eternal.

When self-interest subsides,

fulfillment happens.

Heaven is eternal, earth endures

The reason why heaven & earth can continue and endure

is this:

That their lives are not their own

In this way (they) can go on living

This is why wise ones put themselves last

And yet (their) being advances

Exclude themselves

And yet (their) being persists

Is it not because they have no self-interest?

Thus (they) can fulfill their self-interests

Self

Heaven endures; Earth last a long time.

The reason why Heaven endures

And Earth last a long time,

Is that they do not live for themselves,

Therefore they can long endure.

Therefore the sage puts himself in the background,

Yet finds himself in the foreground.

Puts selfconcern out of [his mind],

Yet finds that his selfconcern is preserved.

It is not that he has no self-interest,

That he is therefore able to attain fulfillment.

Heaven is eternal, earth everlasting.

They endure this way because they do not live for themselves.

In the same way, the wise person puts himself last, and thereby finds himself first;

Holds himself outside, and thereby remains at the center;

Abandons himself, and is thereby fulfilled.

Consciousness is eternal-but why?

Because time does not adhere to its nature.

Time and desire, abstraction and attachment

Cannot touch it.

It transforms, completes, and teaches

All of its aspects,

Within life and beyond death.

The Sage remains behind

And thus it stays ahead.

The student drops his ego

And thus his true self arises.

Separation and division of being are overcome,

Each need is fulfilled

As each excess is abandoned.

The heavens endure; the earth is very old. Why?

Because they do not exist for themselves,

they therefore have long life.

The
truly wise are content to be last;

they are therefore first.

They are indifferent to themselves;

they are therefore self-confident.

Perhaps
because they do not exist for themselves

they find complete fulfillment.

Nature continues long. What is the reason that Nature continues long? Because it produces nothing for itself it is able to constantly produce.

It is for this reason that the Holy Man puts himself in the background; yet he comes to the front. He is indifferent to himself; yet he is preserved.

Is it not because he has no interests of his own that he is able to secure his interests?

Heaven is lasting and earth enduring.

The reason why they are lasting and enduring is that they do not live for themselves; Therefore they live long.

In the same way the Sage keeps himself behind and he is in the front;

He forgets himself and he is preserved.

Is it not because he is not self-interested That his self-interest is established?

Intentional Reversal

Heaven is old and Earth is enduring.

What do Heaven and Earth rely on in order to be old and enduring?

They rely on avoiding self creation.

Hence they can be old and enduring.

Using this: Sages 'later' themselves and yet they comes first.

They 'outside' themselves and yet they abide.

Is this not a case of their lacking selfishness?

So they are able to achieve their selfishness.

The existences of heaven and earth are long-lasting.

Their existences are long-lasting because they do not conceive of their existences as existences.

Therefore, their existences are long-lasting.

When the wise stays back, he steps forward.

When he forgets his self, he finds his self.

Is it not through selflessness that one achieves selfhood?

Heaven and Earth are enduring only because they have no ego;

therefore they can live for ever.

The sage does not try to be the first, and does not fight for fame.

Only through unselfishness can he achieve fulfilment.

Heaven is permanent and earth, everlasting.

The reason why heaven and earth

Can be permanent and everlasting

Is that they do not live for themselves.

Therefore, they can live permanently.

Hence, the sage man

Withdrew himself to the back,

Yet found himself in front;

Cast himself aside,

Yet found himself preserved.

Is it not because he was selfless

That he could fulfill the self?

Heaven and earth will exist forever.

The reason they exist forever is that they do not live for themselves and they do not live because of themselves.

Therefore they live forever.

In the same way, the sage stays behind everything and finds himself in front of everything, he is not himself and he is preserved forever.

Since he has no self-interest, his self-interest can realize itself.

Even though it looks like heaven and earth give life to all creatures, they do not live in order to preserve their own existence, and therefore they live forever and never die.

In his rule over the kingdom, the sage does everything for people, ignoring his personal goals, and ultimately earns glory, honor, and everything he wanted for himself.

Heaven and earth are enduring.

The reason why heaven and earth can be enduring is that they do not give themselves
life.

Hence they are able to be long-lived.

Therefore
the sage puts his person last and it comes first,

Treats it as extraneous to himself and it is preserved.

Is
it not because he is without thought of self that he is able to accomplish his
private ends?

Dimming Radiance

Heaven endures and earth is lasting. And why can heaven and earth endure and be lasting? Because they do not live for themselves. On that account can they endure.

Therefore

The holy man puts his person behind and his person comes to the front. He surrenders his person and his person is preserved. Is it not because he seeks not his own? For that reason he can accomplish his own.

As the Tao can never die, we call it eternal. Receiving all, we call it infinite. The birthless is eternal. The desireless is infinite. Seeing this, a master seeks nothing so he has everything. He doesn't nourish the ego, so his nourishment it total.

The cosmos is long.

The earth is lasting.

The reason the cosmos is long and the earth lasting is that they exist not for self-perpetuation.

Unconcerned with self-perpetuation, they perpetuate.

Thus, the sage,

by queuing himself/herself behind others, ends in being ahead;

by being unconcerned, endures.

Is it not so that the sage, without self-interest, satisfies his/her self-interest?

Heaven goes on forever.

Earth endures forever.

There's a reason heaven and earth go on enduring forever:

their life isn't their own so their life goes on forever.

Hence, in putting himself last the sage puts himself first, and in giving himself up he preserves himself.

If you aren't free of yourself

how will you ever become yourself?

Heaven is permanent and Earth everlasting.

The reason Heaven and Earth are permanent and everlasting is that

They do not exist for themselves.

Therefore they last forever.

Thus the sage:

Gets ahead by staying behind;

Survives by being selfless.

Is it no his being selfless that enables him to fulfill his wishes?

Heavens,
growth, earth, longevity.

In heavens and earth's place

That which is able to grow and further be long-lasting happens

And something lacking existence of a self happens

So it is able to grow and give birth.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Put their bodies behind yet their bodies are ahead

Put their bodies outside yet their bodies are kept in.

Does
it not happen they are absent of anomalous self-interest?

So they are able to perfect self-interest.

If heaven and earth last forever,

it is because they do not live for themselves.

Following this example, the Sage, in withdrawing, advances;

in neglecting himself, he conserves himself.

As he does not seek his own advantage, everything turns to his advantage.

Heaven and earth are everlasting

The reason heaven and earth can last forever

Is that they do not exist for themselves

Thus they can last forever

Therefore the sage:

Places himself last but ends up in front

Is outside of himself and yet survives

Isn't it all due to his selflessness?

That's how he can achieve his own goals

To be "outside of himself" in this context means to be unconcerned with one's well being, to disregard one's body - to sacrifice oneself.

Here we have another example of the Tao paradox: the sage can advance his own "selfish" agenda, by being totally selfless.

Lao Tzu himself is a good example of this. He was content to be a humble, unknown philosopher; he never sought fame and recognition. And yet here we are, reading his words, which have survived the last twenty five centuries and will continue on long after we are gone.

Heaven is eternal, earth is lasting. The reason why heaven and earth are eternal and lasting is because they do not live for themselves; that is the reason they will ever endure.

Therefore the wise man will keep his personality out of sight and because of so doing he will become notable. He subordinates his personality and therefore it is preserved.

Is it not because he is disinterested, that his own interests are conserved?

Heaven and earth are long lasting (chiu).

The reason why heaven and earth are long lasting:

Because they do not live for self (pu tzu sheng).

Therefore they last long.

Thus the sage puts his body (shen) behind,

Yet his body is in front.

He regards his body as external,

Yet his body remains in existence (ts'un).

Is it not because he is selfless (wu szu),

That he can fulfill himself (ch'eng ch'i szu).

The heavens endure; the earth is very old. Why?

Because they do not exist for themselves, they therefore have long life.

The truly wise are content to be last; they are therefore first. They are indifferent to themselves; they are therefore self-confident.

Perhaps it is because they do not exist for themselves that they find complete fulfillment.

Heaven and Earth are everlasting.

Since they were never born, they will never die.

They do not exist for themselves and thus go on forever.

The Tao–Master stays behind and is thus ahead.

He is detached and is thus one with all things.

He is selfless and is thus fulfilled.

Seven

Heaven and Earth last forever.

Why do heaven and Earth last forever?

They are unborn,

So ever living.

The sage stays behind, thus he is ahead.

He is detached, thus at one with all.

Through selfless action, he attains fulfillment.

Heaven and earth exist for ever.

This eternal existence is justified by the fact

That they do not exist for themselves.

Thus they enjoy an eternal life.

The sage similarly puts himself behind others,

Yet it turns out that he comes before others;

He completely disregards his own existence,

And yet it turns out that his existence is preserved.

Heaven and Earth are everlasting.

The reason why they are everlasting

Is that they do not live for themselves.

That is why they can live long.

Therefore the sage

Puts himself last and finds himself first;

He leaves himself out and finds himself preserved.

Is it not because he is selfless

That he can fulfill himself?

The universe is everlasting.

It is eternal because it does not exist for its own sake.

Hence, it will be everlasting.

The sage safeguards his interest by always putting his personal interests last.

He regards his interests as inconsequential.

Yet, it is often preserved.

Is this because by not being self-serving that his interests are always preserved?

Dimming the Light

T'ao Kuang

Heaven is eternal, Earth is durable.

The reason why they are eternal and durable

Is that they do not exist for themselves.

This is why they can long endure.

Therefore, the Sage putting himself behind,

Finds himself in front;

And placing himself beyond his concern,

Finds himself well preserved.

Is this not because he is unselfish?

For the very reason that he is unselfish,

He is able to find Self-fulfilment.

Heaven is eternal: the Earth is ever-renewing.

Why?

Surely it is because they do not live for themselves:

That is why they endure.

And so it is with the Sage.

He keeps himself in the background,

And yet he is always to be found in the forefront.

He is ever unmindful of himself,

And yet he is preserved.

Is it not because he seeks no personal success that all his aims are fulfilled?

Heaven abides; earth lasts.

They last and abide

By not living for themselves.

Hence they live forever.

Therefore the sage

Puts himself last,

Finds himself first;

Abandons his self,

Preserves his self.

Is it not because he has no self

That he is able to realize his self?

Heaven is everlasting and Earth is perpetual.

Why so?

Because they live without holding onto any consciousness of self.

Therefore, they can endure forever.

One who does not separate his being from the nature of universal wholeness lives with the universal virtue of wholeness.

He, too, dissolves all consciousness of self and lives as the universe.

By putting himself behind others,

he finds himself foremost.

By not considering his own personal ends,

his personal life is accomplished.

He finds himself safe, secure and preserved.

Because he does not hold a narrow concept of self,

his true nature can fully merge with the one universal life.

VII.

Sheathing
Brightness

Heaven
is enduring and the earth continues on,

Because
it is not for themselves they live,

So
the sage who keeps behind, the foremost place will find,

Who
puts himself aside, for himself will best provide,

And
unselfishly is able to achieve.

Heaven and Earth can endure long.

If Heaven and Earth endure long,

It is because they do not live for self,

Therefore they can long endure.

That is why the self-controlled man puts himself last,

Yet he is found in the foremost place.

He regards his body as outside of himself,

Yet his body is preserved.

Is it not that his chief interest is in the Inner Life?

Therefore he can perfect his chief interest.

Heaven
lasts long, and

Earth
lasts.

What
is the secret of

their
lasting?

Is
it not because

they
do not live for themselves

That
they can

live
so long?

The
Complete Thinker wants to

remain
behind,

But
is found at

the
head of others;

Ignores
his desires,

But
is found

content.

Is
it not because

of
selflessness

That
True Self is realized?

Heaven is longeval and earth is long lasting. The reason why heaven and earth and longeval and long lasting is because they do not reproduce themselves; therefore they are able to be longeval and long lasting.

That is why the Saint puts himself behind and yet he comes to the fore. He puts himself outside and yet he is preserved. Is it not because he is without personal preference that his personal preference is fulfilled?

Heaven is long-enduring and earth continues long. The reason

why heaven and earth are able to endure and continue thus long is

because they do not live of, or for, themselves. This is how they are

able to continue and endure.

Therefore
the sage puts his own person last, and yet it is found in

the foremost place; he treats his person as if it were foreign to him,

and yet that person is preserved. Is it not because he has no

personal and private ends, that therefore such ends are realised?

Heaven is endless, and Earth is durable. They are durable and endless

because they do not take anything 'personally.'
The
Sages therefore overcome their Ego-interests, and their Souls speak;
they
do not think of themselves as their Egos, yet those remain present.
Being
beyond their purely Egoic motives, they can accomplish their goals.

This
presence is unlimited

Because it wasn't ever born

And it will not be perishing

Will never give you cause to mourn

It
truly wants for nothing

It has no wishes of its own

It is the one and only

Eternally alone

It
holds itself in vacancy

With no desire to advance

Remaining in simplicity

It merely witnesses the dance

The
seer will remain behind

And never yearns for leaving home

Just living in the here and now

Prefers to stay unknown

HEAVEN lasts long, and Earth abides.

What is the secret of their durability?

Is it not because they do not live for themselves

That they can live so long?

Therefore, the Sage wants to remain behind,

But finds himself at the head of others;

Reckons himself out,

But finds himself safe and secure.

Is it not because he is selfless

That his Self is realised?

The Tao is infinite and eternal.

Why is it eternal?

It was never born;

thus it can never die.

Why is it infinite?

It has no desires for itself;

thus it is present for all beings.

The Master stays behind;

that is why he is ahead.

He is removed from all things;

that is why he is one with them.

Because he has let go of himself,

he is perfectly fulfilled.

The Tao of Heaven is eternal,

and the earth is long enduring.

Why are they long enduring?

They do not live for themselves;

thus they are present for all beings.

The
Master puts herself last;

And finds herself in the place of authority.

She detaches herself from all things;

Therefore she is united with all things.

She gives no thought to self.

She is perfectly fulfilled.

True self-interest teaches selflessness.

Heaven and earth endure because they are not simply selfish but exist in behalf of all creation.

The wise leader, knowing this, keeps egocentricity in check and by doing so becomes even more effective.

Enlightened leadership is service, not selfishness. The leader grows more and lasts longer by placing the well-being of all above the well-being of self alone.

Paradox: By being selfless, the leader enhances self.

Heaven is eternal, and Earth is long-lasting.

Why are they so enduring?

Because they do not live for themselves.

Therefore the Sage puts himself last

And finds himself in the foremost place.

He does not promote himself, thus he is preserved.

Because he has no thought of "self,"

He is perfectly fulfilled.

Heaven
and earth will pass away

but Infinity endures forever.

It
had no beginning and so It can never end.

It is the inexhaustible essence of all things.

Because
the sage remains behind

in her oneness with all things,

she anticipates all manifestations.

Being
at one with Infinity,

she is indifferent.

Because
she does not distinguish herself from

other beings,

she is completely fulfilled.

Heaven is everlasting, Earth is enduring.

Heaven and Earth have existed since the dawn of time.

They do this not for themselves, and therefore endure.

Thus does the wise man retire, and therefore lead;

renounce himself to save himself.

Unselfishness is self-fulfillment.

Heaven is eternal and Earth everlasting.

They are eternal and everlasting because they do not exist for themselves,

And thus they last forever.

This is why the Sage puts himself last, yet stays out ahead;

He forgets himself and is thus preserved.

Is this not because being selfless, he will thereby be fulfilled?

The heaven lasts.

The earth lasts.

They last because they do not live to last.

The wise person lags behind in struggles for benefits

And finally benefits more than others;

The wise person does not live for himself,

And is therefore able to enjoy longevity.

Isn't it one's thorough selflessness

That makes one seem to be most successfully selfish?

Heaven is lasting, Earth endures.

What enables Heaven and Earth to last and endure? Because they do not live for themselves - so it is that they can live so long.

And so, the Wise Person: Puts himself last, and so finds himself in front.

puts himself in the out group, and so maintains his place.

The personal does not exist for him - isn't this how he can perfect what for him is most personal?

The sky and the Earth are lasting. They last long because they exist not on themselves and not for the sake of themselves. They are created by Tao and exist for It.

The wise places himself behind others and thus does not hinder other people and can lead them. He does not treasure the life of his body, and his life is guarded by Tao.

This happens because he also exists here not for the sake of himself. This is why his personal needs are realized for him.

The wise exists for Tao and serves It.

The Universe is eternal

It doesn't live for itself.

Thus the Wise One put himself last,

Eventually being in front.

He doesn't take much care of himself,

Thus other people will take care of him.

He doesn't live for himself,

Thus his life is plentiful.

The
highest good is like water. Water is good at benefitting the myriad creatures
and does not contend. It takes its position in the places people hate, and so
it approximates to the Dao.

The
site makes a residence good. Depth makes a mind good. Benevolence makes giving
good. Trustworthiness makes words good. Being able to put things in order makes
government good. Being able to make actual accomplishments make activities good.
Timeliness makes movements good.

Now
only by not contending can there be the absence of animosity.

Heaven lasts; earth endures.

They last and endure because they do not live for themselves.

And thus can live forever.

Therefore, the Sage positions himself behind and yet stays ahead.

He denies himself and so is preserved.

Is it not because of his selflessness

That he completes his own?

The Power of Selflessness

Heaven is eternal., the Earth everlasing.

They can be eternal and everlasting

Because they do not exist for themselves.

For that reason tehy can exist eternally.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals

Put themselves last,

And yet they are first.

Put themselves outside,

And yet they remain.

Is it not because they are without self-interest

That their interests succeed?

What has no beginning can have no end. What has no self-desire is available for all. Separate yourself from possessions and desires and you will be one. Not wanting, you will have everything you need.

The sky is everlasting

And the earth is very old.

Why so? Because the world

Exists not for itself;

It can and will live on.

The
Wise Man chooses to be last

And so becomes the first of all;

Denying self, he too is saved.

For does he not fulfillment find

In being an unselfish man?

Heaven is eternal and Earth everlasting.

Heaven and Earth can be eternal and everlasting because they don't exist for themselves,

And for this reason they obtain longevity.

Therefore the sage puts himself last,

But actually he stands foremost.

He has no regard for himself,

But his life is well preserved.

Is it not because he has no personal interests that his private ends are fulfilled?

Heaven is everlasting, and Earth endless.

That they can last forever and go on without end is because they do not try to exist for themselves.

Thus they can exist forever.

As such, the sage places himself in the rear yet finds himself in front.

He puts aside his person, yet his person is preserved.

Is this not because he is utterly free of self-interest?

This is how he can achieve self-fulfillment.

1. Heaven endures; Earth lasts a long time.

2. The reason why Heaven and Earth can endure and last a long time—

3. Is that they do not live for themselves.

4. Therefore they can long endure.

5.
Therefore the Sage:

6. Puts himself in the background yet finds himself in the foreground;

7. Puts self-concern out of [his mind], yet finds self-concern in the fore;

8. Puts self-concern out of [his mind], yet finds that his self-concern is preserved.

9. Is it not because he has no self-interest,

10. That he is therefore able to realize his self-interest?

Tao never stops.

Why? Because it isn't trying to accomplish anything.

The Masters
hang back.

That's why they're ahead of the game.

They don't hang on to things.

That's how they manage to keep them.

They don't worry about what they can't control.

That's why they're always satisfied.

.

Enduring

Heaven is eternal, and the earth is very old.

They can be eternal and long lasting,

because they do not exist for themselves,

and for this reason can long endure.

Therefore the wise put themselves last,

but find themselves foremost.

They are indifferent to themselves,

and yet they always remain.

Is it not because they do not live for themselves

that they find themselves fulfilled?

Heaven and earth are lasting.

That they do not live for themselves that is what gives them duration.

Likewise the Awakened Man:

Because he keeps his self back he advances; because he gives himself he increases; because he is not concerned about himself he is preserved.

That is it: because he is selfless he attains Self-completion.

Being Selfless Can Fulfill The Selfishness

Lao Tze says,

The Heaven has endured a long existence, so has the Earth.

The reason they can last so long is that they never go out of their way to seek life, hence they can be everlasting.

The sage understood this secret, put himself last, and became first at length.

He treated himself as extraneous, preserving his person safe and sound.

Cannot one who is selfless fulfill the selfishness?

SHEATHING THE LIGHT

When
living by the Tao,

awareness of self is not required,

for in this way of life, the self exists,

and is also non-existent,

being conceived of, not as an existentiality,

nor as non-existent.

The
sage does not contrive to find his self,

for he knows that all which may be found of it,

is that which it manifests to sense and thought,

which side by side with self itself, is nought.

It
is by sheathing intellect's bright light

that the sage remains at one with his own self,

ceasing to be aware of it, by placing it behind.

Detached,
he is unified with his external world,

by being selfless he is fulfilled;

thus his selfhood is assured.

The Tao is infinite, eternal.

Why is it eternal?

It was never born;

thus it can never die.

Why is it infinite?

It has no desires for itself;

thus it is present for all beings.

The Master stays behind;

that is why she is ahead.

She is detached from all things;

that is why she is one with them.

Because she has let go of herself,

she is perfectly fulfilled.

Heaven is enduring and earth is lasting.

Why heaven and earth can be enduring and lasting is because they do not live for themselves, thus, they can endure and last.

So that a Sage ruler put himself behind others, and he came to the front;

he excluded himself from struggle with others and he survived.

It is because he was selfless that he fulfilled himself.

Heaven is eternal, and earth is long lasting.

What makes heaven and earth eternal and long lasting is that they do not give birth to themselves.

It is this that makes them eternal and long lasting.

Hence the sage,

Relaxing the body, the body comes to the fore.

Beyond the body, the body comes to the fore.

Beyond the body, the body exists of itself.

Not even relying on selflessness

Enables the self to be fulfilled.

VII

Heaven
and earth endure forever

They last, because they do not live for themselves

But to nurture the creatures of the world

Following
this, the taoist effaces herself but finds that she is heard

Cares only for others but finds his own needs met

How else can you be nurtured by the tao

Except to give yourself up to it?

Heaven Is Eternal, Earth Is Everlasting

Heaven is eternal, earth is everlasting.

The reason they can be eternal and everlasting

is that they do not foster themselves;

that is why they can live forever.

For this reason sages put themselves last,

and they were first;

they excluded themselves,

and they survived.

Was it not by their very selflessness

that they managed to fulfill themselves?

The universe is long-lasting.

The reason it can last long is because it is not living for itself, therefore it can be enduring.

Following this,

the sage is modest and yet he is ahead of others;

he cares less for himself, and yet he gains respect from others;

is it not because he is not anxious for his goal, and yet his goal is achieved?

Heaven lasts long, and Earth abides long.

What is the secret of their durability?

Is it not because they do not live for themselves that they can live so long?

Therefore, the sage wants to remain behind, but finds himself at the head of others; reckons himself out, but finds himself safe and secure.

Is it not because he is selfless that his self is realized?

Heaven, earth, last forever.

Why? They are selfless, so forever more.

Thus, sages stay behind, yet ahead,

detached, yet with all.

Being selfless, his Self is fulfilled.

Heaven and earth last forever.

The reason why heaven and earth last forever

is that they do not live for themselves.

Hence, they last forever.

Therefore,
the True Person

leaves self behind

and thus is found in front,

is not guarded and thus is preserved,

is self-free and thus is able

to find fulfillment.

The
sky is eternal,

the earth remains.

Energy is constant,

matter is always.

Why do these things outlive us beings?

Because they do not promote

their own existence.

Place yourself last

and thereby be first.

Keep apart

but thereby be included.

Through
this disinterest

and selfless action,

the fulfillment of one's journey

is achieved.

Heaven is always, the earth, too.

How can it be?

Well, they don't live only for themselves;

that's why they live long.

So
the wise man puts himself last, and finds himself in the foremost place,

puts himself in the background; yet always comes to the fore.

He keeps well fit; looks on his body almost as accidental, outer, something
to be well taken care of;

still it always there, and always remains. He remains in the open by it, too.

He hardly strives for great personal ends;

his main ends seem fulfilled.

Heaven is long and earth is lasting.

Heaven and earth can be long and lasting because they do not live for themselves.

Therefore,

They can be long-lived.

For this reason,

The sage withdraws himself but comes to the fore,

alienates himself but is always present.

Is this not because he is free of private interests?

Therefore,

He can accomplish his private interests.

Both Heaven and Earth endure a long time.

The cause of their endurance is their indifference to long life.

This is why the subsist.

Thus the wise man, indifferent to himself, is the greatest among men, and taking no care for himself, he is nevertheless preserved.

By being the most unselfish he is the most secure of all.

As Free as the Tao

You are free to be yourself

in the presence of the Tao.

The Tao has no need for a particular response from you

and is therefore free to be one with you.

You can be exactly as you are

in the presence of your beloved

for the love between you is free

of judgment and fear.

You do not cling to opinions or judgments.

You are each without agenda.

You are therefore as free as the Tao.

Can you speak to each other of daily life

without fear of criticism?

Criticism is the cancer of relationships.

It feeds on healthy love

and turns it to self-absorption.

Find it early

and cut it out!

Heaven is eternal and Earth everlasting.

They can be eternal and everlasting because they do not exist for themselves, And for this reason can exist forever.

Therefore the sage places himself in the background but finds himself in the foreground.

He puts himself away, and yet he always remains.

Is it not because he has no personal interests? This is the reason why his personal interests are fulfilled.

The universe
is deathless,

Is deathless because, having no finite self,

It stays infinite.

A sound man by not advancing himself

Stays the further ahead of himself,

By not confining himself to himself

Sustains himself outside himself:

By never being an end in himself

He endlessly becomes himself.

The heavens and the earth last forever.

They can do so because they do not exist for themselves.

Therefore, great men always let other people go first, but ended up being first themselves.

They put their lives out of consideration, but always survived.

Is it not because they were selfless,

That they benefited themselves at the end?

Heaven is eternal and earth everlasting.

They thus endure forever,

Because they exist not for themselves

But for the whole, selflessly.

Whereby the sage,

Existing selflessly for the whole,

Puts himself behind and thereby finds himself foremost,

Holds himself outside and thereby finds himself inmost.

He has no self apart from the whole,

Wherefore he realizes the self that is the whole.

The heaven lasts.

The earth lasts.

They last because they do not live to last.

The wise person lags behind in struggles for benefits

And finally benefits more than others;

The wise person does not live for himself,

And is therefore able to enjoy longevity.

Isn't it one's thorough selflessness

That makes one seem to be most successfully selfish?

The Tao is infinite and eternal.

Why is it eternal?

It was never born;

thus it can never die.

Why is it infinite?

It has no desires for itself;

thus it is present for all beings.

The Master stays behind;

that is why he is ahead.

He is removed from all things;

that is why he is one with them.

Because he has let go of himself,

he is perfectly fulfilled.

