===== Chapter 29 =====

Should some desire to take the world and run it—

I see they cannot achieve [this].

The world is a spiritual device

Not able to be run, besides.

They who [try to] run it spoil it.

They who hold it in their hands lose it.

Nature might prevail, might comply

Might blow softly, might huff-and-puff

Might be forceful, might win

Might frustrate, might destroy

Therefore, the sage lets go of extremes.

Lets go of extravagance.

Lets go of loftiness.

Trying to control the world? I see you won't succeed.

The world is a spiritual vessel And cannot be controlled. Those who control, fail. Those who grasp, lose.

Some go forth, some are led, Some weep, some blow flutes, Some become
strong, some superfluous, Some oppress, some are destroyed.

Therefore the Sage Casts off extremes, Casts off excess, Casts off Extravagance.

Those who wish to conquer the world and act upon it

Do not achieve their goals - this is what I have found.

The world is a perfect vessel.

It cannot be acted upon.

Those who act on it destroy it.

Those who grab at it lose it.

Because with things:

Some lead and some follow,

Some blow hot and some blow cold,

Some grow in strength and some weaken,

Some expand and some collapse.

That is why the sage rejects the excessive,

Rejects the elaborate,

And rejects the superfluous.

FOLLY OF HARD CONTROL

Those who would conquer the world by making humankind and events

conform to their desire,

Never succeed -

For the sovereignty of the world is

subtle, sacred, spiritual.

Tampering with it, shaping or changing it,

Harms, mars, spoils and destroys it.

Reaching for it, grabbing or grasping at it,

It is gone - lost.

There exists constant alternation -

Advance - Retreat

Blowing Hot - Blowing Cold

Strength - Weakness

Rise - Fall

The Sage, therefore, avoids all extremes,

extravagances and excesses.

If you have deep-seated desires to control Heaven below (the sacred body) and manipulate it, you will see that you do not benefit!

Heaven below is a sacred vessel that cannot be manipulated!

Manipulation destroys it.

Seizing it separates you from your reason for existence.

Sometimes you will progress, sometimes you will imitate.

Sometimes you will breath out, sometimes you will breathe in.

Sometimes you will be strong, sometimes you will be weak.

Sometimes you will break, sometimes you will be broken.

This is why the sage rejects extremes, rejects extravagances, and rejects excesses.

REFRAINING FROM ACTION

He that, desiring a kingdom, exerteth himself to obtain it, will fail. A

Kingdom is of the nature of spirit, and yieldeth not to activity. He who

graspeth it, destroyeth it; he who gaineth it, loseth it.

The
wheel of nature revolveth constantly; the last becometh first, and

the first last; hot things grow cold, and cold things hot; weakness

overcometh strength; things gained are lost anon. Hence the wise man

avoideth effort, desire and sloth.

Whoever wishes to rise by conquest will fail. The true goal in lifeis spiritual and can not be conquered by force. The aggressor destroysit. The conqueror loses it. Mankind is forever in change, Some run ahead,soon they fall back. Some are powerful, soon they weaken. Some are fiery,soon they are cold. Some are victorious, soon defeated. The Sage is notmoved by earthly ambitions, he avoids self aggrandizement, he avoids selfelevation.

One who thinks he is capable of improving Creation, will not succeed

Creation is perfect and cannot be corrected

One who intervenes in nature, will only destroy nature

One who tries to control nature, will lose to nature

Because everything is what it is and everything happens as it happens

At times it is warm and then it is cold

At times there are storms and then it's calm

There is growth and then there is lying down

A wise man lets himself flow along with the streams of life

Whenever someone sets out to remold the world, experience teaches that he is bound to fail.

For Nature is already as good as it can be. It cannot be improved upon. He who tries to redesign it, spoils it. He who tries to redirect it, misleads it.

Consider how Natures operates: Some things precede while others follow. Some things blow one way while some blow another. Some things are strong while others are weak. Some things are going up while others are going down.

Therefore the intelligent man avoids both extremes, shunning excess in one way as well as in the other.

Those that would gain what is under heaven by tampering with it -

I have seen that they do not succeed.

For that which is under heaven is like a holy vessel, dangerous to tamper with.

Those that tamper with it, harm it.

Those that grab at it, lose it.

For among the creatures of the world some go in front, some follow;

Some blow hot when others would be blowing cold.

Some are feeling vigorous just when others are worn out.

Therefore the Sage "discards the absolute, the all-inclusive, the extreme".

There are those who want to control the realm

and make it more to their liking.

They will never succeed.

The realm of heaven and earth is perfect, a sacred vessel.

It cannot be improved.

He who tries to change it, destroys it for himself.

He who tries to hold it, loses all contact.

It is natural for beings to sometimes lead, sometimes follow,

sometimes breathe hot, sometimes blow cold.

sometimes expand, sometimes decay,

sometimes overcome, sometimes collapse.

The sage therefore abandons pleasure, judgment and pride.

When taken by desire to take hold of nature

and reconstruct things

We notice that this (will) never reach closure

The world is a spirit vessel

Not suited to reconstruction at all

Those who interfere spoil things

Those who grab lose things

And so the beings sometimes go ahead, sometimes follow

Sometimes snort, sometimes puff

Sometimes are fit, sometimes are feeble

Sometimes hold up, sometimes break down

This is why wise ones avoid the extremes

Avoid the superfluous

Avoid the extravagant

Blindness

Fot those who like to take control

of the world and act on it -

I see that with this they simply will not succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel;

It is not something that can be acted upon.

Those who act on it, destroy it.

Those who hold on it, lose it.

With things - some go forward, others follow;

Some are hot - others submissive and weak;

Some rise up - while others fall down;

Therefore the Sage avoids extremes,

Excesses, and extravagance.

If you try to grab hold of the world and do what you want with it, you won't succeed.

The world is a vessel for spirit, and it wasn't made to be manipulated. Tamper with it and you'll spoil it. Hold it, and you'll lose it.

With Tao, sometimes you move ahead and sometimes you stay back; Sometimes you work hard and sometimes you rest; Sometimes you're strong and sometimes you're weak; Sometimes you're up; sometimes you're down.

The sage remains sensitive, avoiding extremes, avoiding extravagance, avoiding excess.

To those who would alter Nature,

Or spread reform upon the earth,

I say this: though your efforts be endless,

You will not succeed.

Alteration, control, improvement:

They are repugnant to Nature,

For perfection requires no refinement.

The impulse to control

Only deforms what you wish to manage.

Thus, it is lost to you.

This is a principle that all can use:

Sometimes it leads and sometimes follows;

Sometimes it breathes in and sometimes out;

Sometimes it is growing, sometimes diminishing;

Sometimes it builds up, sometimes it collapses.

This is the way things are.

Thus the Sage withdraws from excess,

And retreats from display.

Where arrogance boasts,

Where pride struts,

The Sage will never be found.

Those who seek to conquer the world

and shape it as they see fit never succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel and cannot be improved.

Whoever tries to alter it spoils it;

whoever tries to direct it, misleads it.

So,
some things advance, others lag;

some proceed in silence, others make sound;

some are strong, others weak;

some are forward, others retiring.

Therefore
the truly wise avoid extremes,

extravagance, and foolish pride.

I perceive that no desire can succeed which has as its objective the moulding of the state. The state possesses a divine capacity, which cannot be moulded.

To make is to mar; to grasp is to lose.

Thus in nature some things lead, others follow; some inspire, others expire; some are strong, some are weak; some survive, others succumb; hence, the Holy Man renounces excess, extravagance, exaltation.

When a man is to take the world over and shape it, I see that he must be obliged to do it.

For the world is a divine vessel: It cannot be shaped; Nor can it be insisted upon. He who shapes it damages it; He who insists upon it loses it.

Therefore the Sage does not shape it, so he does not damage it; 'He does not insist upon it, so be does not lose it. 'For, among all things, some go ahead, while others lag behind; Some keep their mouth shut, while others give forth puffs; Some are strong, while others are weak; Some are on the cart, while others fall off.

Therefore the Sage avoids excess, extravagance and indulgence.

Deeming

Those who desire to take the social world and deem-act it,

I see that they just don't get it.

The social world is an energized artifact.

It is not the case that it can be deemed.

Those who deem-act crush it.

Those who grasp lose it.

Hence, among natural kinds sometimes act,

sometimes conform.

sometimes snort

sometimes blow.

sometimes be strong

sometimes weak.

sometimes control

sometimes destroy.

Using this: Sages abandon superlatives,

abandon extravagance,

abandon expansiveness.

If one undertakes the task of governing the kingdom and engages in governing it,

I see that he cannot lead it anywhere.

A kingdom is a spiritual vessel and should not be manipulated.

Manipulating it leads to failure.

To grasp it is to miss it.

Because the natures of things vary, one acts, another copies;

One breathes lightly, another breathes heavily;

One is vigorous, one is meek;

One carries on, another fails.

Thus, the wise is not excessive, overindulgent, or extreme.

To rule the country with force is a matter that cannot be avoided - as I see.

Yet to hold the land under Heaven with force cannot be done.

Whoever does it will fail.

Whoever tries to control it will lose it.

If there is something that goes in the front, there will be something that follows behind.

If there is something that makes warmth, there will be something that cools it down.

If there is something that creates strength, there will be something that makes it weak.

If there is something that reaches its goal, there will be something that breaks it.

Therefore the sage stays away from opposing the rule of Nature,

from seeking luxuriousness, from doing what is against his own duty.

He who wishes to win all under heaven,

And act upon them -

In my view, he cannot prevail.

All under heaven are sacred vessels

That cannot be acted upon.

He who acts upon them ruins them;

He who holds on to them loses them.

For people -

Some walk; some follow;

Some blow warm; some blow cold;

Some are strong; some weak;

Some safe; some in danger.

Hence, the sage man

Abandoned excessiveness;

Abandoned arrogance;

Abandoned extravagance.

When a person undertakes to hold and mold the world,

I see that he will fail in this task.

Since the world is an instrument of God:

It cannot be molded,

It cannot be held.

He who tries to mold it damages it,

He who insists on holding it loses it.

Therefore the sage does not mold it, and therefore he does not damage it,

He does not try to hold it, and therefore he does not lose it.

With all things, some move forward while others lag behind,

Some hold their tongues, while others speak a lot,

Some are strong, while others are weak,

Some are on the wagon, while others fall off.

Therefore the sage avoids excess, extremism, haughtiness, lust, and arrogance.

Whoever takes the empire and wishes to do anything to it I see will have no
respite.

The empire is a sacred vessel and nothing should be done to it.

Whoever does anything to it will ruin it;

whoever lays hold of it will lose it.

Hence
some things lead and some follow;

Some breathe gently and some breathe hard;

Some are strong and some are weak;

Some destroy and some are destroyed.

Therefore
the sage avoids excess, extravagance, and arrogance.

Non-Assertion

When one desires to take in hand the empire and make it, I see him not succeed. The empire is a divine vessel which cannot be made. One who makes it, mars it. One who takes it, loses it.

And it is said of beings:

"Some are obsequious, others move boldly,

Some breathe warmly, others coldly,

Some are strong and others weak,

Some rise proudly, others sneak."

Therefore the holy man abandons excess, he abandons extravagance, he abandons indulgence.

You cannot change the world, only yourself. The world is in constant natural change, how could you add to it? If you try to change it you will ruin yourself. If you treat it like an object, you objectify yourself. Simply follow the natural flow of the changes: Sometimes lead, Sometimes follow, Sometimes move, Sometimes stop, Sometimes be active, Sometimes be at rest, Sometimes be safe, Sometimes be in danger. The master knows the world is beyond his control, so lets things come and go without interfering. He is like a blade of grass: When the wind blows it bends with it. This way he is always centered and keeps his energy.

One who plans to govern the people in the world with coercion is,

in my view, unlikely to succeed.

The people in the world are revered specimens,

They cannot be coerced; they cannot be dominated.

One who seeks to coerce is defeated;

One who seeks to dominate loses.

The sage practices laissez-faire.

Thus, the sage will not be defeated, the sage will not lose.

Among matters,

some lead and others follow;

some breathe slowly and others fast;

some are robust and others slim;

some play safe and others blast.

Thus,

the sage discards extremes, discards extravagances, discards excesses.

Longing to take hold of all beneath heaven and improve it...

I've seen such dreams invariably fail.

All beneath heaven is a sacred vessel,

something beyond all improvement.

Try to improve it and you ruin it.

Try to hold it and you lose it.

For things sometimes lead and sometimes follow,

sometimes sigh and sometimes storm,

sometimes strengthen and sometimes weaken,

sometimes kill and sometimes die.

And so the sage steers clear of extremes, clear of extravagance, clear of exaltation.

Whoever intends to conquer the empire through willful actions,

I foresee that he will not succeed.

The empire is a complex organism, no willful action should be taken.

He who so acts fails.

He who so exerts control loses it.

For, of all creatures:

some lead, some follow;

some sigh, some complain;

some are strong, some are weak;

some suffer setbacks, some are already fallen.

Thus a wise ruler avoids extremes, extravagance, and excesses.

It
is attained, the desire to grab the world yet be acting on it

I see it has not been satisfied yet

The world, a spirited tool, cannot act either.

Those
who act are spoiling

Those who take hold of are losing.

So
of things

Some lead and some follow

Some gust and some puff lightly

Some are strong and some thin

Some support and some destroy.

Appropriately
it happens that sages are

Apart from extremes

Apart from extravagance

Apart from excess.

He who holds the empire would, in my view, be wishing for failure should he want to manipulate it (to act positively, to govern actively).

The empire is a mechanism of extreme delicacy. It should be let go all alone. It should not be touched. He who touches it, deranges it. He who wishes to appropriate it, loses it.

When he governs, the Sage lets all people (and their sum, the empire) go free according to their several natures, the agile and the slow, the ardent and the apathetic, the strong and the weak, the long-lived and the short-lived.

He limits his action to the suppression of excesses which would harm the whole, such as power, wealth, and ambition.

Those who wish to take the world and control it

I see that they cannot succeed

The world is a sacred instrument

One cannot control it

The one who controls it will fail

The one who grasps it will lose

Because all things:

Either lead or follow

Either blow hot or cold

Either have strength or weakness

Either have ownership or take by force

Therefore the sage:

Eliminates extremes

Eliminates excess

Eliminates arrogance

There are those who want to meddle with the world, or the environment. They want to control it, manipulate it, and interfere with it.

What I observe is that they cannot possibly achieve what they desire. The world is a sacred thing, beyond the insignificant power of mere mortals.

None of us can control the world. Those who try will fail, and those who hang on to it and refuse to let go will still lose their grip.

In nature, all things live in balance with one another. Some of them lead while others follow. Some blow air to impart warmth, while others do so to cool things down. Some are strong, while others are weak. Some occupy their own niche in the environment, while others survive by force and violence.

Because the Tao is all about balance, the sage, seeking to emulate nature, will seek the same balance through moderation. He or she will elminate from his or her life anything that is extreme or intemperate. The sage will also avoid any excess or wasteful extravagance. And lastly, the sage will let go of thoughts and behaviors that are arrogant or ego-driven.

NOT FORCING THINGS (WU WEI)

One who desires to take and remake the Empire will fail. The Empire is a divine thing that cannot be remade. He who attempts it will only mar it.

He who seeks to grasp it, will lose it. People differ, some lead, others follow; some are ardent, others are formal; some are strong, others weak; some succeed, others fail. Therefore the wise man practices moderation; he abandons pleasure, extravagance and indulgence.

One who desires to take the world and act (wei) upon it,

I see that it cannot be done.

The world (t'ien hsia) is a spirit vessel (shen ch'i),

Which cannot be acted (wei) upon.

One who acts (wei) on it fails,

One who holds on to it loses (shih).

Therefore things either move forward or follow behind;

They blow hot or blow cold;

They are strong (ch'iang) or weak;

They get on or they get off.

Therefore the sage gets rid of over-doing,

Gets rid of extravagances,

Gets rid of excesses.

Those who seek to conquer the world and shape it as they see fit never succeed. The world is a sacred vessel and cannot be improved. Whoever tries to alter it, spoils it; whoever tries to direct it, misleads it. So, some things advance, others lag; some proceed in silence, others make sound; some are strong, others weak; some are forward, others retiring. Therefore the truly wise avoid extremes, extravagance, and foolish pride.

Do you think you can control the world? I don't think so.

The world belongs to the Tao. It can't be controlled.

If you mess with it, you'll ruin it.

If you try to grab it, you'll lose it.

Some things move on; others remain behind;

some things are hot; others are cold;

some things are strong; others are weak;

some things are up; others are down.

The Tao–Master renounces extremes, excess, and extravagance.

Twenty-nine

Do you think you can take over the universe and improve it?

I do not believe it can be done.

The universe is sacred.

You cannot improve it.

If you try to change it, you will ruin it.

If you try to hold it, you will lose it.

So
sometimes things are ahead and sometimes they are behind;

Sometimes breathing is hard, sometimes it comes easily;

Sometimes there is strength and sometimes weakness;

Sometimes one is up and sometimes down.

Therefore
the sage avoids extremes, excesses, and complacency.

He who wants to gain the kingship by force

Can never be successful, I think.

The kingship is so sacred

That cannot be obtained through force.

Those who try to obtain it by force will ruin it;

Those who keep it by force will lose it.

Because things are different:

Some go ahead or follow;

Some breathe gently or hard;

Some are strong or weak;

Some are in safety or in danger.

Hence the sage does away with extremity, extravagance and excess.

Do you wish to conquer all under Heaven and rule it?

I see you will never succeed.

All under Heaven is a sacred vessel;

No one can rule it by action.

Whoever rules it by action destroys it;

Whoever seizes it loses it.

Therefore, among the creatures,

Some go, some follow;

Some breathe lightly, some blow hard;

Some are strong, some are weak;

Some break, some fall.

Therefore the sage

Shuns extremes,

Shuns extravagance,

Shuns vanity.

If you want to rule the world according to your own whims,

It is unlikely to be successful.

Governing a country is a sacred mission.

You must not be meddlesome or intransigent.

He who is meddlesome will flounder in his job.

He who is rigid and foolhardy will lose the plot.

It takes all sorts to make the world.

Some are leaders and some are followers.

Some are highly excitable and some are calm.

Some are strong and some are weak.

Some feel secure and some feel threatened.

Nevertheless, the sage forsakes excess, extravagance and arrogance.

Non-Action

Wu Wei

One might wish to get hold of the world,

And wilfully interfere with it.

In my view, this is bound to fail.

The world is a Divine Vessel.

It cannot be interfered with.

He who interferes with it spoils it;

He who grasps it loses it.

For among the creatures of the world,

Some are leaders, some are followers;

Some tend to condone, some to condemn;

Some are strong, some are weak;

Some are forward-looking, some are downcast.

The Sage, therefore, eschews the excessive,

Eschews the extravagant, and eschews the extreme.

Those who attempt to seize all under Heaven by force do not, in my experience, succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel and cannot be so handled.

Those who handle it, spoil it;

Those who grasp it, lose it.

For consider:

There are creatures who go ahead and others who follow after;

There are those who blow hot, and others who blow cold;

Some who feel strong when others fel weak;

Some who mount the wagon, while others fall off.

Therefore the Sage avoids the excesive, the extravagant, the grandiose.

Does anyone want to take the world

And act on it?

I don't see how he can succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel

Not to be acted on.

Whoever acts on it spoils it;

Whoever grasps at it loses.

Indeed, there is a time for

Some things to go forward

And some to go behind;

Some to blow hot

And some to blow cold,

Some to grow in strength

And some to decay;

Some to be up

And some to be down.

Therefore the sage

Eschews excesses, extremes, and extravagances.

Those who want to conquer the world and make it conform to their own desires will never have success,

for the sovereignty of the world is a subtle thing.

He who tries to shape it spoils it.

He who tries to hold it loses it.

The things of the world are constantly changing.

There is a time for things to move ahead,

and a following time for things to retreat;

a time to withdraw internally,

and a following time to expand externally;

a time to grow luxuriantly,

and a following time to decay;

a time to rise up,

and a following time to sink down low.

Therefore, one who does not separate his being from the deep nature of the universe avoids all extremes, extravagance and excess.

XXIX.

Nothing
Through Acting

If
one start out to take the world in hand,

And
make it, he will never gain his end,

For
spirit-vessels are not made like pails,

And
he who makes mars, who grasps fails.

For,
in the course of things, if some one press

Ahead,
some other lags behind, and will,

While
one has warmth, another one is chill,

While
one is strong, another weakly shrinks,

One
keeps himself afloat, another sinks.

Therefore
the sage abandons all excess,

And
all extravagance and selfishness.

If you desire to gain the kingdom by action,

I see that you will not succeed.

The kingdom is a spiritual vessel,

It cannot be gained by action.

He who acts, destroys it

He who grasps, loses it.

Therefore behold the animals:

Some go in front, others follow;

Some are warm, others cold;

Some are strong, others feeble;

Some keep moving, others are still.

That is why the self-controlled man puts away excess, he puts away egotism, he puts away easy living.

Does
anyone want to take the world

and
do what he wants with it?

I
do not see how they can succeed.

The
world

is
a sacred vessel,

which
must not be

tampered
with

or
grabbed after.

To
tamper with it

is
to spoil it,

and
to grasp

is
to lose it.

For
all things

there
is a time for going ahead,

and
a time for following behind;

A
time for slow-breathing

and
a time for fast-breathing;

A
time to grow in strength

and
a time to decay;

time
to be up

and
a time to be down.

The
Complete Thinker

avoids
all extremes,

excesses

and
luxuries.

Travels

the
middle path.

Those who would seize All-under-heaven by means of action, - I have seen to what plight they come!

The spiritual vessel of All-under-heaven cannot me made. He who makes it, spoils it; he who holds it, loses it.

Therefore the Saint does nothing and so spoils nothing; he holds nothing and so loses nothing.

For things sometimes go forward, sometimes they lag behind; sometimes they breathe gently, sometimes they pant violently; sometimes they are strong, sometimes they are feeble; sometimes they start afresh, sometimes they decay.

Therefore the Saint avoids too much emphasis; he avoids extravagance; he avoids excess.

If any one should wish to get the kingdom for himself, and to

effect this by what he does, I see that he will not succeed. The

kingdom is a spirit-like thing, and cannot be got by active doing. He

who would so win it destroys it; he who would hold it in his grasp

loses it.

The
course and nature of things is such that

What was in front is now behind;

What warmed anon we freezing find.

Strength is of weakness oft the spoil;

The store in ruins mocks our toil.

Hence
the sage puts away excessive effort, extravagance, and easy

indulgence.

Of the many who wish to grab the universe and 'use' it,
Ego has never
had even one success.
Now,
the universe is a Divine Alembic, not something to 'use.'
Who strives to
'use' it will be defeated; who grasps it will fail.
Of
Creatures; some march forward, others follow behind;

some tremble in silence, others are puffed-up;

some are agressive, others are meek;

some build things up, others collapse them.
For
these reasons, Sages avoid extremism;

avoid excesses;

avoid being grandiose.

Do
you want to change the world?

You cannot possibly succeed

The given cannot be improved

On this the seers are agreed

At
times you find you're out in front

At other times you fall behind

Sometimes
you're all commotion

But afterwards you must unwind

When
all around is turmoil

Just stay with the serene

You are the quiet center

Of the ever changing scene

Can
you see things as they are

And let them be all on their own?

Remain in pure awareness

You never need to stray from home

DOES anyone want to take the world and do what he wants with it?

I do not see how he can succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel, which must not be tampered with or grabbed after.

To tamper with it is to spoil it, and to grasp it is to lose it.

In fact, for all things there is a time for going ahead, and a time for following behind;

A time for slow-breathing and a time for fast-breathing;

A time to grow in strength and a time to decay;

A time to be up and a time to be down.

Therefore, the Sage avoids all extremes, excesses and extravagances.

Do you wish to change the world?

If you wish to change the world

and adjust it to your desires,

you cannot succeed.

The world is shaped by the Way;

the self cannot shape it.

If you tamper with it, you'll ruin it.

If you treat it like an object, you'll lose it.

The world is as it is, so;

Some will be leaders;

while others will be followers.

Some will be warm, others cold.

Some will be strong, others weak.

Some will get where they are going,

While others will fall by the side of the road.

The Master sees things as they are,

without trying to control them.

He lets them go their own way,

and resides at the center of the path.

Do you want to rule the world and control it?

I don't think it can ever be done.

The
world is sacred vessel

and it can not be controlled.

You will only it make it worse if you try.

It may slip through your fingers and disappear.

Some
are meant to lead,

and others are meant to follow;

Some must always strain,

and others have an easy time;

Some are naturally big and strong,

and others will always be small;

Some will be protected and nurtured,

and others will meet with destruction.

The
Master accepts things as they are,

and out of compassion avoids extravagance,

excess and the extremes.

Too much force will backfire. Constant interventions and instigations will not make a good group. They will spoil a group.

The best group process is delicate. It cannot be pushed around. It cannot be argued over or won in a fight.

The leader who tries to control the group through force does not understand group process. Force will cost you the support of the members.

Leaders who push think that they are facilitating process, when in fact they are blocking process.

They think that they are building a good group field, when in fact they are destroying its coherence and creating factions.

They think that their constant interventions are a measure of ability, when in fact such interventions are crude and inappropriate.

They think that their leadership position gives them absolute authority, when in fact their behaviour diminishes respect.

The wise leader stays centered and grounded and uses the least force required to act effectively. The leader avoids egocentricity and emphasizes being rather than doing.

Do you want to own the World and improve it?

I don't think you can.

You see, the World is sacred.

It can't be improved upon.

If you try you will ruin it.

If you try to own it,

You will lose it.

Therefore, sometimes you must lead and sometimes you must follow.

Sometimes you need to blow hard, and sometimes you can breathe easily.

Sometimes you must be strong and sometimes tender.

Sometimes you win and sometimes you lose.

Knowing this, the Sage avoids extremes, extravagances and exhaustion.

Do
you think you can control the world?

I do not believe it can be done.

The
world is a manifestation of change

and cannot be controlled.

If
you try to control it, you will end up deceiving

yourself.

If you treat it like an object, it will overwhelm

you.

The
world is a manifestation of change;

sometimes ahead, sometimes behind,

sometimes dynamic, sometimes static,

sometimes vigorous, sometimes feeble,

sometimes manifesting, sometimes

disintegrating.

Therefore,
refuse to distinguish excesses and

extremes.

See only oneness.

Flow with Infinity

and exist in peace and harmony.

This desire to conquer the World and rule it, in my opinion, is futile.

The World is a spiritual entity, not able to be governed.

He who tries, fails. Even the most persistent do not succeed.

For some lead, and some follow.

Some sigh, and some bellow.

Some are strong, and some are weak.

Some rise, and some fall.

Thus does the wise man avoid extremes, avoid extravagance, avoid excess.

Would it be possible to take charge of the world and make it better than it is?

I do not believe that such a thing is possible.

Since the world is sacred

No improvements can be made.

If you try to change it, you will spoil it.

If you try to grasp it, you will lose it.

So, there are times

for forging ahead, and for staying behind;

for keeping silent, and for speaking aloud.

Some are strong, while others are weak;

Some rejoice, while others lament.

This is why the Sage avoids excess, extremes, and extravagance.

A willful doer cannot, as I see it, win the world,

The world cannot be willfully manipulated or controlled.

One who tries to manipulate it will destroy it.

One who tries to control it will lose it.

The wise does nothing to manipulate or control

And will, therefore, neither destroy nor lose.

For there are forever subtle changes in the world.

People walk either in front or behind.

They are either inhaling or exhaling,

Either strengthening or weakening,

And doing either good or harm.

That is why the wise will never desire too much.

When someone wants to take over the world and do some work on it, I can see he won't be able.

The world is a spirit-thing, it can't be 'worked' on. One who works ruins one who grasps loses.

Yes, things: Sometimes they will go ahead, sometimes follow after sometimes they will be snorting wildly sometimes breathing easily sometimes they will be strong, sometimes weak sometimes they will break, sometimes destroy.

And so the Wise Person: Avoids excess, avoids extravagance, avoids being grandiose.

Some people have a great desire to rule the entire world, and they try to succeed in this aspiration. I do not see how it can be possible, since the world is a container of wonderful, invincible Tao! And no one can rule Tao!

He who anyway aspires to this surely will fail!

Everyone has a choice: to oppose harmonious flow of the events of beingness or to follow it. The former will struggle and lose strength; the latter will bloom in harmony and strengthen.

The wise never aspires to power, glut, luxuries, prodigality.

The one who wants to master the world

To shape it the way he wants, will not succeed.

The world is sacred, it cannot be permanently changed.

Being
confident of something, we might be wrong.

On traveling some people are in front, some behind,

Some breathe easy, some heavy,

Some are strong, some weak,

Some walk, same sit in a carriage.

The
Wise Person prefers the middle way.

Being in harmony, neither he goes to the extreme nor is he lazy

In doing actions with his body and mind.

Should
one desire to take the world and control it, I see that there would be no end
[to one's involvement]. The world is a holy vessel and cannot be controlled.
Those who try to control it harm it. Those who clutch at it lose it. For some
things go before and some things follow. Some things snort and some things blow.
Some things are strong and some things are puny. Some things are nurtured and
others are destroyed. For that reason the Sage gets rid of extremes, extravagances,
and excesses.

He who wants to take the world and act on it will not be able to achieve, I know.

The world is a sacred vessel

Which cannot be acted on.

To act on it is to destroy it.

To seize it is to lose it.

So the things

Either lead or follow;

Either whistle or blow;

Either are strong or weak;

Either defeat or fall.

That is why the Sage abandons the excessive, the extravagant, and the extreme.

The Way of Noninterference

Those who would take hold of the world and act on it,

Never, I notice, succeed.

The world is a mysterious instrument,

Not made to be handled.

Those who act on it, spoil it.

Those who seize it, lose it.

So, in Natural Law

Some lead, some follow;

Some agitate, some remain silent;

Some are firm, some are weak;

Some carry on, some lose heart.

Thus, Evolved Individuals

Avoid extremes,

Avoid extravagance,

Avoid excess.

The grasses are green in this valley. The clouds are white. The sky is blue and the water will always be wet. That is how they are and there is nothing you can do about it. So stop thinking.

As for those who would take the whole world

To tinker as they see fit,

I observe that they never succeed:

For the world is a sacred vessel

Not to be altered by man.

The tinker will spoil it;

Usurpers will lose it.

For
indeed there are things

That must move ahead,

While others must lag;

And some that feel hot,

While others feel cold;

And some that are strong,

While others are weak;

And vigorous ones,

While others worn out.

So
the Wise Man discards

Extreme inclinations

To make sweeping judgments,

Or to a life of excess.

He who desires to govern under Heaven and build up achievements will not succeed, which I assert.

"The under Heaven" which is a queer thing, cannot be handled arbitrarily.

He who acts arbitrarily will harm it,

He who holds on to it will lose it.

Therefore of all creatures (in themselves) some lead and some follow, some breathe and some blow, some are strong and some weak, some are baffled and some destroyed.

For this reason, the sage should discard the extremes, the extravagant and the excessive.

As for those who would like to take all under Heaven and act on it, the way I see it, such action would never end, because all under Heaven is the numinous vessel,

Which cannot be acted on.

One who acts on it will destroy it;

one who tries to grasp it will lose it.

Thus some people tend to lead and some follow;

some breathe in through the nose and some blow out through the mouth;

some are strong and some weak;

and some are energetic and some lazy.

As this is so, the sage rids them of extremism, extravagance, and complaisance.

1. For those who would like to take control of thw world and act on it—

2. I see that with this they simply will not succeed.

3. The world is a sacred vessel;

4. It is not something that can be acted upon.

5. Those who act on it destroy it;

6. Those who hold on to it lose it.

7.
With things—some go forward, others follow;

8. Some are hot, others submissive and weak;

9. Some rise up while others fall down.

10. Therefore the Sage:

11. Rejects the extreme, the excessive, and the extravagant.

Want to take
over the world?

Think again.

The world's a holy place.

You can't just fuck around with it.

Those who try to change it destroy it.

Those who try to possess it lose it.

With Tao, you
push forward

or maybe you stay behind.

Sometimes you push yourself,

other times you rest.

Sometimes you're strong,

sometimes you're weak.

Sometimes you're up, and sometimes you're down.

A Master lives
simply,

avoiding extravagance and excess.

.

Do Not Tamper with the World

Those who take over the world and act upon it,

I notice, do not succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel, not to be tampered with.

Those who tamper with it, spoil it.

Those who seize it, lose it.

Some lead, and some follow.

Some blow hot, and some blow cold.

Some are strong, and some are weak.

Some are up, and some are down.

Therefore the wise avoid excess, extravagance, and pride.

Winning and controlling the empire by deeds is the way that leads to failure.

Because the empire is a divine vessel not to be grasped and not to be bargained for.

One who tries to seize it does no comprehend it.

One who tries to take it loses it:

He thinks he is getting ahead and is staying behind.

He thinks he is increasing and is dwindling away.

He believes he is strong and reveals his weakness.

He believes he is above others and succumbs.

How different the Sage:

He avoids arrogance and impetuousness.

Instead of doing he accomplishes through non-action.

Warning Against Interference

Lao Tze says,

If there is a king who wishes to take over the world and establishes a man-made order, I can predict that he will not make it at all.

For the world is of divine entity and it can't be subjugated to a man-made order.

Whoever wants to try will result in failure.

Whoever insists on his point of view will plunge in loss.

Because,

when one wishes to march forward, others just follow reluctantly;

when one wishes to breathe making a thing warm, others blow it cold;

when one wishes to strengthen it, others wish to weaken it;

when one wishes to sustain it, others wish to destroy it.

Hence the sage puts away excessive effort, extravagance, and easy indulgence.

TAKING NO ACTION

The
external world is fragile,

and he who meddles with its natural way,

risks causing damage to himself.

He who tries to grasp it,

thereby loses it.

It
is natural for things to change,

sometimes being ahead, sometimes behind.

There
are times when even breathing

may be difficult,

whereas its natural state is easy.

Sometimes
one is strong,

and sometimes weak,

sometimes healthy,

and sometimes sick,

sometimes is first,

and at other times behind.

The
sage does not try

to change the world by force,

for he knows that force results in force.

He avoids extremes and excesses,

and does not become complacent.

Do you want to improve the world?

I don't think it can be done.

The world is sacred.

It can't be improved.

If you tamper with it, you'll ruin it.

If you treat it like an object, you'll lose it.

There is a time for being ahead,

a time for being behind;

a time for being in motion,

a time for being at rest;

a time for being vigorous,

a time for being exhausted;

a time for being safe,

a time for being in danger.

The Master sees things as they are,

without trying to control them.

She lets them go their own way,

and resides at the center of the circle.

Will anybody want to lead the world according to his selfish design?

I see that he will never attain his end.

The sacred instrument of the world cannot be grasped or intervened:

one who intervenes will be defeated;

one who grasps will lose it.

Among things:

some are moving ahead, others are following behind;

some are breathing in air, others are breathing in water;

some are strong, others are weak;

some are still carried on and some are dropped.

Therefore, a Sage ruler avoided:

Extreme, Extravagance and Indulgence.

I see that those who want to take over the world and manipulate it do not succeed.

The sacred mechanism of the world cannot be manipulated.

Those who manipulate it will fail,

Those who hold on to it will lose it.

Matter

Either leads or follows,

Either heats or chills,

Either strengthens or weakens,

Either enhances or destroys.

So the sage abandons extremes, extravagance, multiplicity.

XXIX

Would
you try to improve the way the world works?

You won't succeed

The way the world works is the mold by which it continues working

Nothing else can make it work

You can follow it and you can use it

But try to mold it, and it will slip through your fingers

Some
things are fast and some are slow

Some are hot and some cold

Some are strong and some weak

Some rise and some sink

So the taoist allows for all these things

Preferring none over the other

Should You Want

Should you want to take the world,

and contrive to do so,

I see you won't manage to finish.

The most sublime instrument in the world

cannot be contrived.

Those who contrive spoil it;

those who ding lose it.

So creatures sometimes go and sometimes follow,

sometimes puff and sometimes blow,

are sometimes strong and sometimes weak,

begin sometime and end sometime;

therefore sages remove extremes,

remove extravagance,

remove arrogance.

To conquer and rule the world, I think, is not achievable.

The world is like a sacred utensil, which cannot be taken and held.

Whoever tries to conquer it will fail.

Whoever tries to hold it will lose it.

Thus, the sage does not try this, so he can avoid failure.

The sage does not try to own the world, so he loses nothing.

Things can be fast or slow, warm or cool, strong or weak, light or heavy.

The sage avoids the excessive, extravagant, and grandiose.

If anyone wants to take the world and directs it at his will, I do not see how he can succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel, which cannot be directed at one's will.

To direct it is to fail.

To grasp it is to lose it.

Some things go ahead, some follow, some breathe slowly, some breathe fast, some are strong, some are weak, some grow in strength, some decay.

Therefore, the sage avoids "very", "too" and "extreme".

Can you alter the universe?

I don't think so.

The universe is sacred (invariant, yet ever flowing),

cannot be altered.

Try to alter, you fail.

Try to hold on, you lost it.

Things (phenomena), could be moving ahead, following behind,

as hard, as soft, as strong, as weak.

Thus, the sages avoid extremes, excesses, and complacency.

Whoever wishes to take over the world

will not succeed.

The world is a sacred vessel

and nothing should be done to it.

Whoever tries to tamper with it

will mar it.

Whoever tries to grab it

will lose it.

Hence,
there is a time to go ahead

and a tirne to stay behind.

There is a time to breathe easy

and a time to breathe hard.

There is a tirne to be vigorous

and a tirrle to be gentle.

There is a tine to gather

and a time to release.

Therefore,
the True Person avoids extremes,

self-indulgence, and extravagance.

The
person who believes that inner experience

can be governed or controlled or taught

will simply fail.

A person's inner universe is like a house of cards

beautiful, delicate, in perfect balance.

Tamper with it -- it falls.

Glue it together -- it serves no purpose.

In the world of religion

there are leaders and there are followers.

Some people speak a lot while others remain silent.

Some are active, some are passive.

Some ideas remain, others disappear.

The
atheist has nothing to do with

absolutes, logical necessity, or agnosticism.

Those that would gain what's under heaven by tampering with it - Ive seen that
they don't succeed.

For that which is under heaven is like a holy vessel, dangerous to tamper with.
Those that tamper with it, harm it. Human go-between is likely to fail. Those
that grab at it lose it. Who makes can spoil well; who holds can lose.

Among creatures of this world some lead and some follow. Some things go forward
among creatures: some go in front, some follow behind -

Some blow out, some blow in; some blow out while others would blow in.

Some are feeling vigorous just when others are worn out. Some are strong, some
are weak.

Some are loading just when others would be tilting out. Some can break, some
can fall.

So the wise man discards excess, extravagance, and ridiculous pride: He discards
even the absolute, the all-inclusive, the extreme.

Of those who wish to take hold of all-under-heaven and act upon it,

I have seen that they do not succeed.

Now,

All-under-heaven is a sacred vessel,

Not something that can be acted upon;

Who acts upon it will be defeated,

Who grasps it will lose it.

Of creatures,

some march forward, others follow behind;

some are shiveringly silent, others are all puffed up;

some are strong, others are meek;

some pile up, others collapse.

For these reasons,

The sage

rejects extremes, rejects excess, rejects extravagance.

When a man who wishes to reform the world takes it in hand, I perceive that there will be no end to it!

Spiritual vessels are not fashioned in the world.

Whoever makes destroys; whoever grasps loses.

For perforce if one advances another is left behind; if one blows hot another will blow cold; if one be strengthened another will be weakened; is one be supported another will be undermined.

Therefore the Sage gives up all enthusiasm, levity, and pomp.

A Time for Every Mood

Let your moods come and go.

Each of you will feel sad and happy;

full of vigor and exhausted;

peaceful and anxious;

loving and withdrawn;

and each of these feelings

will insist on having its proper time.

If you cease trying to control them,

you will create for each other

a smoother, happier way.

They will arise and fall

against a backdrop of contentment and serenity.

The yin and yang of life

are obvious in our changing moods.

The less you worry about them

the freer they will be to play their proper role,

and the freer you each will be

to live in joy.

When one desires to take over the empire and act on it (interfere with it), I see that he will not succeed.

The empire is a spiritual thing, and should not be acted on. He who acts on it harms it. He who holds on to it loses it.

Among creatures some lead and some follow. Some blow hot and some blow
cold. Some are strong and some are weak. Some may break and some may
fall.

Therefore the sage discards the extremes, the extravagant, and the excessive.

Those who would
take over the earth

And shape it to their will

Never, I notice, succeed.

The earth is like a vessel so sacred

That at the mere approach of the profane

It is marred

And when they reach out their fingers it is gone.

For a time in the world some force themselves ahead

And some are left behind,

For a time in the world some make a great noise

And some are held silent,

For a time in the world some are puffed fat

And some are kept hungry,

For a time in the world some push aboard

And some are tipped out:

At no time in the world will a man who is sane

Over-reach himself,

Over-spend himself,

Over-rate himself.

Whoever wants to fiddle with the world for his own purposes,

I expect that he will fail.

The world is something sacred that cannot be fiddled with.

Whoever fiddles with it will ruin it, whoever obtains it will lose it.

Therefore, among the things in the world, some go first,

some follow behind;

Some are slow, some are fast;

Some are strong, some are weak;

Some are helpful, some are destructive.

So, the great men removed the excess, the extra, and the extreme.

Those who want to take control of the world by force can never succeed,

For the world is a sacred vessel of dynamic energy, not meant to be controlled.

Those who try to forcibly control it will ruin it.

Those who try to forcibly keep it will lose it.

Because life is not a static entity but a dynamic process,

Sometimes one moves ahead and sometimes follows behind.

Sometimes one works hard and sometimes takes rest.

Sometimes one grows strong and sometimes grows weak.

Sometimes one is supported and sometimes is unsupported.

Wherefore, the sage, knowingly moving with the dynamic flow of life,

Avoids extremes, avoids extravagance, and avoids excess.

A willful doer cannot, as I see it, win the world,

The world cannot be willfully manipulated or controlled.

One who tries to manipulate it will destroy it.

One who tries to control it will lose it.

The wise does nothing to manipulate or control

And will, therefore, neither destroy nor lose.

For there are forever subtle changes in the world.

People walk either in front or behind.

They are either inhaling or exhaling,

Either strengthening or weakening,

And doing either good or harm.

That is why the wise will never desire too much.

Do you wish to change the world?

If you wish to change the world

and adjust it to your desires,

you cannot succeed.

The world is shaped by the Way;

the self cannot shape it.

If you tamper with it, you'll ruin it.

If you treat it like an object, you'll lose it.

The world is as it is, so;

Some will be leaders;

while others will be followers.

Some will be warm, others cold.

Some will be strong, others weak.

Some will get where they are going,

While others will fall by the side of the road.

The Master sees things as they are,

without trying to control them.

He lets them go their own way,

and resides at the center of the path.

