===== Chapter 77 =====

The Way of Heaven—its similarity to stretching a bow?

That which is high—[it] pulls it down.

That which is low—[it] lifts it up.

That which has excess—[it] reduces it.

That which is lacking—[it] adds to it.

The Way of Heaven

Takes away [where] there is excess

And adds to [where there is] lack.

The way of people

Necessarily different

Takes away [where there is] lack

In order to offer to [that which] has excess.

Who can have surplus by means of offering [it] to the world?

Only those who have the Tao.

Therefore, the sages

Act but do not presume

Achieve goals but do not dwell [on them].

They do not desire to be seen as praiseworthy or despicable.

Heaven's Tao Is a stretched bow, Pulling down on the top Pulling up on the bottom.

If it's too much, cut. If it's not enough, Add on to it: Heaven's Tao.

The Human Route Is not like this, Depriving the poor, Offering to the
rich. Who has a surplus And still offers it to the world? Only those
with Tao.

Therefore the Sage Acts and expects nothing, Accomplishes and does not linger, Has no desire to seem worthy.

The Tao of heaven is like the bending of a bow.

What is high is brought down.

What is low is sent high.

What's excessive is reduced.

What's insufficient is increased.

The Tao of heaven takes from those who have too much

And gives to those who are in want.

The people's way is not like that.

They take from those who are in want

And give to those who have too much.

Yet who is able to have enough to give it to the world?

Only the one who has Tao.

Therefore the sage toils but expects no praise.

He does his work but does not dwell on it.

He does not wish to make a display of his merit.

EQUILIBRIUM

As a bow is bent, so bends the way of nature.

That at the top,

Bent downward toward the center.

That at the bottom,

Bent upward toward the center.

The string -

If too long, is shortened,

If too short, is lengthened.

The Tao of nature strives for equilibrium.

That which is abundant is reduced.

That which is deficient is supplemented.

Mankind, on the other hand, will often -

Further reduce what is deficient,

Supplement that which is abundant.

The Sage alone -

Having abundance, offers it to the world.

Works quietly without arousing attention.

Acts without claiming recognition or reward.

Has no desire to reveal his superiority.

Heaven's Tao is similar to drawing a bow.

A bow joins the high that is brought down, with the low that is lifted up.

Surplus decreases.

Deficiency is supplemented.

Heaven's Tao reduces a surplus and replenishes a deficiency.

Humanity's Tao is not like the following: There is not enough, therefore give to those who have a lot.

Who is able to have abundance and serve Heaven below (the sacred body)?

Only those who have the Tao.

The sage does their work and does not expect a reward.

They complete their work and do not stop.

They do not have deep-seated desires to show that their actions exceed others'.

THE WAY OF HEAVEN

The Tao of Heaven is likened to the bending of a bow, whereby the high

part is brought down, and the low part raised up. The extreme is

diminished, and the middle increased.

This
is the Way of Heaven, to remove excess, and to supplement

insufficiency. Not so is the way of man, who taketh away from him that

hath not to give to him that hath already excess.

Who
can employ his own excess to the weal of all under Heaven? Only he

that possesseth the Tao.

So
the Wise Man acteth without lust of result; achieveth and boasteth

not; he willeth not to proclaim his greatness.

May not the Way (or Tao) of Heaven be compared to the (method of) bendinga bow? The (part of the bow) which was high is brought low, and what waslow is raised up. (So Heaven) diminishes where there is superabundance,and supplements where there is deficiency. It is the Way of Heaven to diminishsuperabundance, and supplements where there is deficiency. It is the Wayof Heaven to diminish superabundance, and to supplement deficiency. Itis not so with the way of man. He takes away from those who have not enoughto add to his own superabundance. Who can take his own superabundance andtherewith serve all under heaven? Only he who is in possession of the Tao!Therefore the (ruling) sage acts without claiming the results as his; heachieves his merit and does not rest (arrogantly) in it:-he does not wishto display his superiority.

The natural order is like stretching a bow

The low bow gets pushed up high

And the high tendon pulled downwards

Where there is too much, it takes away

Where there is not enough, it fills

Nature strives for harmony all the time

Decreases where there is too much

And increases where there is too little

But how opposite are the people in their behaviour

The poor get poorer while the rich tend to get richer

But one who is wise realizes that possession is burglary to community

Therefore he disposes himself of that which belongs to the community

So only one who is wise is detached

He does what others ask him to, but nothing for himself

Without taking credit for it

Nature's way is like the bending of a bow: The top which is high is lowered while the bottom which is low is raised, And the width which is narrow is widened while the length which is long is shortened.

Nature's way is to take from those that have too much and give to those that have too little.

Man's way, on the contrary, is to take away from those who have too little to give more to those who already have too much. What kind of man is able to take away from his own more than enough and give to others who have less than enough?

Only he who embodies Nature's way within himself. Such a man gives his gift without desiring a reward, achieves benefit for others without expecting approbation, And is generous without calling attention to his generosity.

Heaven's way is like the bending of a bow.

When a bow is bent the top comes down and the bottom-end comes up.

So too does Heaven take away from those who have too much,

And give to those that have not enough.

But if it is Heaven's way to take from those who have too much

And give to those who have not enough, this is far from being man's way.

He takes away from those that have not-enough in order

To make offering to those who already have too much.

One there is and one only, so rich that he the possessor of Tao.

(If, then, the Sage "though he controls does not lean,

And when he has achieved his aim does not linger",

It is because he does not wish to reveal himself as better than others.)

The way of heaven, is it not like the stringing of a bow?

The high end is lowered, the low is raised up.

If the string is too long it is shortened.

If the string is too short it is lengthened.

The way of heaven takes from the excessive

and gives to the insufficient.

The way of man is different.

Those with too much take from those who have little.

Who keeps just enough and gives the rest to the world?

Only observers of Tao.

The sage works without expectation.

Achieves without taking credit.

He does not desire to seem worthy.

Heaven has its path

Compare it to the drawing of a bow

What is high comes to be lowered

What is lowly comes to be raised

What has abundance will be diminished

What is incomplete will be added to

Heaven's way decreases where there is surplus

And adds to what is insufficient

Humanity's path is normally not like this,

Decreasing what is not enough

in order to give to what is excessive

Who can claim an abundance

in order to offer to nature?

Only those who keep the way

This is why wise ones develop but do not expect

Accomplish works but do not linger

They have no ambition to show merit

Balance

The Tao of Heaven is like the bending of a bow.

The high it presses down, and the low it raises up.

To those with a surplus, it takes away;

To those without enough, it adds on.

Therefore the way of Heaven

is to reduce the excessive

and increase the insufficient;

The way of Man -

Is to reduce the insufficient

and offer more to the excessive.

Now, who is able to have a surplus

And use it to offer to Heaven?

Clearly it is only the one who possesses Tao.

Therefore the Sage -

Takes action, but do not possess them;

Accomplishes his tasks - but does not dwell on them.

Like this, is his desire

Not to make a display of his worthyness.

The way of heaven is like the bending of a bow. What is high up gets pulled down. What is low down gets pulled up.

Heaven takes from what has too much and gives to what doesn't have enough. Man is different: he takes from those who have too little and gives to those who have too much.

Who has a genuine abundance to give to the world? Only a person of Tao.

He acts without expectation, accomplishes without taking credit, and has no desire to display his merit.

The Tao of life is like the drawing of a bow,

Yet without the arrow:

Higher and lower are mutually attracted,

Until they seem to change places.

The long and the short complement

And support the function of the whole.

The Tao of life draws off excess,

And provides for what is depleted.

The way of man departs from this:

It devours the dwindling resources

To serve contrived, compulsive needs.

How can we learn to use the gifts of Nature,

Amid this grasping world?

Let the Tao guide you:

Your true self gives, and claims no credit.

Its work furthers all, without attaching to the results.

It conceals its worth,

Which is therefore felt by all.

This is the way of complementarity.

The Tao Te Ching as a work of significant environmental awareness is again highlighted in this verse. Lao Tzu uses the image of a bow that draws itself, without the need of arrows, to describe the operations of Nature: it continually adjusts and maintains its balance when it "draws off excess" to "provide for what is depleted." This metaphor was copied, probably by a Confucian writer, into the Image of Hexagram 15, Modesty, of the I Ching:

Thus the superior man reduces that which is too much,

And augments that which is too little. (Wilhelm/Baynes, p. 64).

However, Lao Tzu points out that there is no need for a "superior" or "cultivated" man to achieve this balance. Indeed, fixed notions of superiority and inferiority, higher and lower, are certain to disrupt and distort the way of Nature. All that is needed is the presence of the true self, unencumbered by false notions of superiority or acculturation. Our natural being knows exactly how to accord with the cosmic principle of inner balance: simply allow the long and the short to complement and support one another, because they are truly equal. For the bow is drawn, after all, with but one string.

Is not Tao like the drawn bow?

The highest part is lowered,

the lowest part is raised.

Overall length is shortened,

overall depth is lengthened.

So
the Great Tao

lowers the highest and raises the lowest.

But the Tao of man

increases the high and decreases the low.

Who
can take from the high and give to the low?

Only the true follower of Tao.

Thus,
the truly wise act but are not possessive,

achieve but claim no credit,

because they have no desire for vain glory.

The Divine Way is like the drawing of a bow, it brings down the high and exalts the low. Where there is superfluity it takes away, where there is deficiency it imparts. It is the way of heaven to diminish abundance, and supplement deficiency.

The way of man is not so. He depletes the deficient, that he may supplement the superfluous.

Who is able to have a superabundance for the service of the world? Only the possessor of the Tao! Hence the Holy Man acts without priding himself on his actions, completes his work without lingering on it; he has no desire to display his superiority.

Is not the Tao of heaven like the drawing of a bow? It brings down the part which is high; it raises the part which is low; it lessens the part which is redundant (convex); it fills up the part which is insufficient (concave). The Tao of heaven is to lessen the redundant and fill up the insufficient. The Tao of man, on the contrary, is to take from the insufficient and give to the redundant. Who can take from the redundant and give to the insufficient? Only he who has Tao can. Therefore the Sage does not horde. The more he helps others, the more he benefits himself the more he gives to others, the more he gets himself. The Tao of heaven does one good but never does one harm; the Tao of the Sage acts but never contends.

The Natural Guide

The guide of nature: Is it not like a taut bow?

That which is high, represses them.

That which is low, raise them up.

That which has abundance, pare it back.

That which is insufficient, add to it.

The guide of nature is to pare back abundance and add to the insufficient.

If it's the guide of humans then it's not like that.

It injures that which is not sufficient and piles it on that which has abundance.

Who can have abundance and use it to pile it on the social world?

Only one who has a guide.

Using this: Sages Deem-act and don't rely on anything.

His work is accomplished and he doesn't locate it.

This is his not desiring the apprehending of worthies.

The course of nature is similar to the curve of a bow:

That which is at the top is pulled down;

That which is at the bottom is brought up.

That which is overfull is reduced;

That which is deficient is supplemented.

The course of nature is to reduce what is overfull

And to supplement what is deficient.

The course of man is to reduce what is deficient

And to supplement what is overfull.

Who can supplement the overfull for the people of the world?

Only the man of Tao can do it.

Therefore, with the wise, work is done and no one depends on it.

Achievements are made, but no one claims credit.

Is he not free from wishing to show off his superiority?

Isn't the Tao of Heaven like stretching a bow?

When it is high, it presses down,

when it is low, it lifts up.

When it is surplus, it reduces.

When it is deficient, it increases.

The Tao of Mankind is the opposite: it reduces the deficiency in order to add to the surplus.

Only the one who has the Tao offers his surplus to others.

Therefore the sage benefits others, yet claims no gratitude,

accomplishes his task, yet assumes no merit.

It is only because he does not want to be considered as a virtuous person.

Heaven's Tao

Is like the fixing of a bowstring:

Too high, lower it;

Too low, lift it.

More than enough, reduce it;

Not enough, replenish it.

Therefore, heaven's Tao

Takes from those who have more than enough

To replenish those who do not have enough;

Man's way

Takes from those who do not have enough

To offer to those who have more than enough.

Who can, having more than enough,

Offer some to heaven?

Perhaps only those who possess the Tao.

Hence, the sage man

Helped without possessing,

Scored merits without claiming.

That is how

He did not wish to parade his worth.

Is not the superior Tao like drawing a bow?

The high part moves downward, the low part moves upward,

What is full is reduced, what is insufficient is filled.

The superior Tao reduces the full, fills what is insufficient.

Man's Tao, in contrast, takes from the insufficient and gives to the full.

Who can take from the full and give to the insufficient?

Only he who has the Tao can.

Therefore, the sage does not hoard anything for himself.

The more he helps others, the more he obtains for himself.

The superior Tao does good, and never does evil,

The sage's Tao acts, but never hurts others.

Is not the way of heaven like the stretching of a bow?

The high it presses down,

The low it lifts up;

The excessive it takes from,

The deficient it gives to.

It
is the way of heaven to take from what has in excess in order to make good what
is deficient.

The way of man is otherwise: it takes from those who are in want in order to
offer this to those who already have more than enough.

Who is there that can take what he himself has in excess and offer this to the
empire?

Only he who has the way.

Therefore
the sage benefits them yet exacts no gratitude,

Accomplishes his task yet lays claim to no merit.

Is
this not because he does not wish to be considered a better man than others?

Heaven's Reason

Is not Heaven's Reason truly like stretching a bow? The high it brings down, the lowly it lifts up. Those who have abundance it depleteth; those who are deficient it augmenteth.

Such is Heaven's Reason. It depleteth those who have abundance but completeth the deficient.

Man's Reason is not so. He depleteth the deficient in order to serve those who have abundance.

Where is he who would have abundance for serving the world?

Indeed, it is the holy man who acts but claims not; merit he acquires but he does not dwell upon it, and does he ever show any anxiety to display his excellence?

The Tao functions like a bending bow. When something is gained, something else is lost. If there is excess here, there will be deficiency there. A rich man, who takes more from those who are lacking, will become deficient in the Tao. The master gives, therefore he has. He doesn't need recognition and acts with no thought of reward. With no thought of reward, everything he does is rewarding.

The cosmos's Direction is like extending a bow.

Aiming too high, it lowers;

aiming too low, it raises.

From the excessive, it takes;

to the insufficient, it augments.

The cosmos's Direction is to take from the excessive and augment the insufficient.

This is not so for the direction in humans, which is to take from the insufficient to augment the excessive.

Who is willing to augment [the insufficient of] the world with excesses?

Only ones with Direction.

Thus,

a sage provides without expecting approbation,

accomplishes without seeking acclamation,

does without flaunting wisdom.

The Way of heaven is like a drawn bow pulling down the high and raising up the low:

it takes away where there's abundance and restores where there's want.

The Way of heaven takes away where there's abundance

and restores where there's want,

but the Way of humankind isn't like that:

it takes away where there's want

and gives where there's abundance.

Only a master of the Way can give abundance to all beneath heaven.

Such a sage acts without presumption and never dwells on success:

great worth has no need to be seen.

Is Heaven's way like aiming an extended bow?

If aiming too high, lower it;

If aiming too high, raise it.

Thus,

The surplus is reduced and the needy supplemented.

The way of Heaven is to reduce the surplus so as to supplement the needy.

The way of Mankind is just the opposite:

It takes away from the needy so as to enrich the surplus.

Who would offer their surpluses to the world?

Only followers of Tao.

So the sage it to:

Care for but not to master;

Complete the work without claiming credit; and

Avoid recognition of his achievements.

The
tao of the heavens, it is just like opening up a bow

With that which towers being restrained

That which is lowered being lifted

That which has surplus being decreased

That which lacks enough being supplemented.

The
tao of the heavens

Decreasing in the presence of surplus

Yet supplementing what lacks enough.

The
tao of man, and then it lacks being so

Reducing what lacks enough

Coming to esteem the presence of surplus.

Who
is able to come to esteem presence of surplus in the world?

Only those present with tao.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Act yet without relying

Are of outstanding service yet without dwelling therein

They
lack desire to display principles.

Heaven acts (with regard to men) like the archer who, bending his bow, makes the convexities straight and the concavities bulge, diminishing the greater and augmenting the lesser. (Lowering the higher, and raising the lower).

It takes away from those who have plenty, and adds to those who have little. Whereas men (bad princes who bleed the people) do quite the opposite, taking away from those who lack (the people), in order to add to those who have in abundance (their favourites) ...

Any superfluity ought to come back to the empire (to the people), but only he who possesses the Principle is capable of that.

The Sage conforms himself to the Principle. He influences without attributing the result to himself. He accomplishes without appropriating his work to himself. He does not claim the title of the Sage, (but keeps himself in voluntary obscurity).

The Tao of heaven

Is like drawing a bow

Lower that which is high

Raise that which is low

Reduce that which is excessive

Add to that which is insufficient

The Tao of heaven

Reduces the excessive

And adds to the insufficient

The Tao of people is not so

Reducing the insufficient

In order to offer to the excessive

Who can offer their excess to the world?

Only those who have the Tao

Therefore sages act without conceit

Achieve without claiming credit

They do not wish to display their virtue

The workings of the Tao can be compared to archery - specifically to the act of drawing the bow to fire off an arrow.

If the arrow is pointing too high, the archer must lower the aim. If the aim isn't high enough, the archer must compensate by tilting up.

The amount of strength that goes into pulling back the bowstring has to be just right. If it's too much, the arrow will overshoot the target, so one has to reduce any excessive force.

On the other hand, if the archer fires off the arrow with insufficient force, it will fall short of the target. In order for the arrow to fly true, the archer must put more strength into the bow and draw back further.

This is similar to natural laws in that the Tao also acts in a balanced way. It tends to reduce whatever is too much, and add to that which is not enough. Thus, everything in the world is constantly moving toward equilibrium.

(For instance, a pot of hot water, if left alone, will gradually cool off. Just as certainly, ice cubes will melt and become cold water that will, over time, approach room temperature. This is the way of the heavenly Tao.)

The way of people isn't quite like that. People often act in ways opposite to the balancing principle of the Tao. They cut down that which is already lacking and give to that which already has too much.

(We can see an aspect of this by noting that all over the world, it is the rule rather than the exception that the rich get richer while the poor get poorer.)

Who are the ones that can see this clearly and choose not to follow the herd? Only those who have the Tao. Whenever they have too much of something, they offer the surplus to those who do not have enough.

In this way, the Tao sages act in accordance with nature and give in the same way that nature does - without having expectations, claiming credit, or feeling that they are somehow superior for having given.

Just like the Tao, they contribute and nurture others without needing to show off. It makes no difference to them if people never find out about the good that they have done. Having the Tao is its own reason and justification.

Notes

The lines "Lower that which is high / Raise that which is low" can also be interpreted as what happens to the bow when the archer pulls back: the top of the bow lowers and the bottom goes up.

The same line of thought leads to the idea that the next two lines "Reduce that which is excessive / Add to that which is insufficient" refer to the process of adjusting the length of the bowstring when making the bow.

We have chosen the classical interpretation that refers to aiming instead, because it is clear from the first line that the simile is all about the process of drawing open the bow (to fire an arrow) rather than the process of crafting a bow. All four lines refer to aiming: the archer adjusts the vertical angle of the arrow as well as the amount of force invested in it.

In this chapter Lao Tzu offers a penetrating insight into human nature: rather than moving toward balance, people often go contrary to the Tao in unbalancing their lives even more.

For instance, note what happens when people overindulge. They do not reduce the indulgence as they should. Instead, they feed it even more. This is how addictions begin.

Also note how people jump on bandwagons when it comes to beliefs, attitudes, trends and fads. Rather than to think for themselves, they jump on the bandwagon because so many other people are already on it.

TAO OF HEAVEN

Tao of heaven resembles the stretching of a bow. The mighty it humbles, the lowly it exalts. They who have abundance it diminishes and gives to them who have need.

That is Tao of heaven; it depletes those who abound, and completes those who lack.

The human way is not so. Men take from those who lack to give to those who already abound. Where is the man who by his abundance can best serve the world?

The wise man makes but claims not, he accomplishes merit, yet is not attached to it, neither does he display his excellence. Is it not so?

The way of heaven,

Is it not like stretching a bow?

What is high up is pressed down,

What is low down is lifted up;

What has surplus (yu yü) is reduced,

What is deficient (pu tsu) is supplemented.

The way of heaven,

It reduces those who have surpluses,

To supplement those who are deficient.

The human way is just not so.

It reduces those who are deficient,

To offer those who have surpluses.

Who can offer his surpluses to the world?

Only a person of Tao.

Therefore the sage works (wei) without holding on to,

Accomplishes without claiming credit.

Is it not because he does not want to show off his merits?

Is not Tao like a drawn bow? The highest part is lowered, the lowest part is raised, overall length is shortened, overall depth is lengthened.

So Tao lowers the highest and raises the lowest. But the Tao of man increases the high and decreases the low.

Who can take from the high and give to the low? Only the true follower of Tao. Thus, the truly wise act but are not possessive, archieve but claim no credit because they have no desire for vain glory.

The Tao is like the bending of a bow.

The top is bent downward; the bottom is bent up.

If the cord is too long, it is shortened;

if it is too short, it is lengthened.

The policy of the Tao is to take from those who have too much

and give to those who have too little.

But that is not the human practice.

We take from those who have too little

and give to those who have too much.

Who is it that has more than enough

and gives his surplus to those in need?

Only the follower of the Tao.

The follower of the Tao acts without hope of gain,

accomplishes but takes no credit,

does not wish to lord it over others.

Seventy-seven

The Tao of heaven is like the bending of a bow.

The high is lowered, and the low is raised.

If the string is too long, it is shortened;

If there is not enough, it is made longer.

The Tao of heaven is to take from those who have too much and give to those
who do not have enough.

Man's way is different.

He takes from those who do not have enough and give to those who already have
too much.

What man has more than enough and gives it to the world?

Only the man of Tao.

Therefore
the sage works without recognition.

He achieves what has to be done without dwelling on it.

He does not try to show his knowledge.

Does not the Tao of heaven resemble the bending of a bow (aiming):

Pressing down the high,

Lifting up the low,

Reducing the excessive,

Compensating the deficient?

So the Tao of heaven means to compensate the deficient by reducing the excess.

The Tao of man is different:

It gives to one who already has more than enough by taking from one who is in want.

Who can offer what he has in excess to the people?

Only the man of Tao.

Thus the sage

Benefits all things without claiming to be their benefactor;

Succeeds without claiming credit;

Because he does not want to show off his wisdom.

The way of Heaven -

Isn't it like stretching a bow?

You press down the high,

Raise the low,

Take away the excess,

Add to the deficient.

The way of Heaven

Takes away from those who have too much and gives to those who have not enough.

The way of man

Is not so.

It takes away from those who have not enough and offers to those who have too much.

Who can have too much and offer to all under Heaven?

Only the man of Tao can.

Therefore the sage

Rules without depending on anyone.

His work is done, but he never dwells in it.

He does not wish to show his worthiness.

The way of Dao operates like the art of archery.

When you aim too high, you have to adjust downwards.

When you aim too low, you have to adjust upwards.

If the tension is excessive, you lower it.

If the tension is inadequate, you augment it.

The way of Dao is to take from the excess and give it to the deficient.

In the human realm, it is totally different.

It is the case of robbing the poor and giving it to the rich.

Who would take from the haves and give it to the have-nots?

Only the people who follow the way of Dao would.

Therefore, the sage does things without ulterior motives.

When he accomplishes, he does not claim credit.

It is because he does not want to appear sagacious.

The Way of Heaven

T'ien Tao

The Way of Heaven,

Is it not like stretching the bow?

What is high is brought low;

What is low is pulled up;

What is superfluous is taken off;

What is deficient is strengthened.

The Way of Heaven takes from what has a surplus

To supply what has a deficit.

The way of men acts differently.

It takes from what has a deficit

To serve what has a surplus.

Who will use his surplus to serve the world?

Only the man who is possessed of Tao.

Thus the Sage acts but does not presume on the result;

He achieves success but does not claim any credit.

Doesn't this show that he dislikes showing off his worth?

Kapitel nicht vorhanden / chapter not available

Heaven's Tao is like a stretched bow:

The top goes down and the bottom goes up. What has much is shortened;

What has little is increased.

Heaven's Tao takes from those with much

And gives to those with little.

Man's way is not so:

It takes from those with little

And gives to those with much.

Who uses muchness

To serve beneath heaven?

Only he who has Tao!

Therefore the sage

Does but does not claim,

Completes his work but takes no credit.

He does not want his merit seen.

The subtle Way of the universe: is it not expressed in the stretching of a bow?

The high it presses down.

The low it lifts up.

The excessive it takes from.

The deficient it gives to.

It is the nature of this subtle truth to take from what is excessive and give to what is deficient.

The way of man, however, is otherwise.

It takes from those in need to give to those who already have more than enough.

Only one of whole virtue always has something to give to others.

Therefore, one of whole virtue does things, but does not keep them for himself;

accomplishes his tasks, but does not cling to them.

He has no desire to trade his virtue for people's worship.

LXXVII.

The
Way of Heaven

May
not the Way of Heaven be compared

To
the bending of a bow,

Bringing
down the part which formerly was high,

And
raising up the low?

It
takes from men their superabundant things,

Which
to the poorer go.

But
while it is the Way of Heaven to curb

All
superfluity,

And
supplement, for those who lacking are,

Their
own deficiency,

Men s
way is different quite, they rob the poor,

That
richer they may be.

Who
are the men who, with great store of wealth,

Their
fellow-men can bless

By
serving them? Tis only who, themselves,

The
Tao of Heaven possess.

Therefore
the sage will act, but never claim

Himself
the benefits,

Accomplish
deeds of merit, then retire

Unseen
from where he sits;

And
does he ever seek to make display

Of
worth
he
ne er admits?

Heavenly Tao is like the bending of a bow.

That which is high is bent downwards,

That which is low is raised up,

That which is too much is lessened,

That which is not enough is increased.

Heavenly Tao takes from those who have too much,

And gives to those who have not enough.

The way of man is not thus,

He takes from those who have not enough,

And gives to those who already have too much.

Who is able to hold his wealth in order to give it to men?

Only he who has the Tao.

That is why the self-controlled man acts without looking for reward, he brings to perfectness without claiming credit, he desires not to let his wosdom appear.

Maybe

the Laws of the Universe (Tao)

may be compared

to the

stretching

of a bow!

The upper part is depressed,

while the lower is raised.

If the bow-string is too long,

it is cut short:

if too short,

it is added to.

The Laws of the Universe (Tao)

makes smaller

the more-than-enough

to supply

the less than enough.

The way of people

is different:

it takes

from the poor

to give

the rich.

Who except

a person of the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ) can put

their never ending riches

to the service of the world?

The Complete Thinker

does work

without setting any store by it,

accomplishes tasks

without dwelling upon them.

They do not want their merits to be seen.

The Way of heaven, how like the bending of a bow it is! What is up is pressed down, and what is down is raised up; the surplus is reduced, want is supplied.

The Way of heaven reduces where there is a surplus and supplies where there is want. The Way of men however is not thus; they reduce where there is want and proffer where there is a surplus.

Who is able to proffer his surplus where there is want? Only he who has the Way.

Therefore the Saint, when he acts, does not rely (on the results); when the work is accomplished, he does not rest in it.

The Saint does not hoard. Having regarded everything as belonging to others, he has greater abundance himself. Having given everything to others he has the more himself.

The Way of heaven brings profits but not harm. The Way of the Saint is to act but not to strive.

He has no desire to display his ability.

May not the Way (or Tao) of Heaven be compared to the (method

of)
bending a bow? The (part of the bow) which was high is brought

low, and what was low is raised up. (So Heaven) diminishes where

there is superabundance, and supplements where there is deficiency.

It
is the Way of Heaven to diminish superabundance, and to

supplement deficiency. It is not so with the way of man. He takes

away from those who have not enough to add to his own superabundance.

Who
can take his own superabundance and therewith serve all under

heaven? Only he who is in possession of the Tao!

Therefore
the (ruling) sage acts without claiming the results as

his; he achieves his merit and does not rest (arrogantly) in it:--he

does not wish to display his superiority.

The
Path of Heaven is like bending a bow-
the upper part is pressed down,

the lower part is raised up;
the part which has much is reduced,
the
part that has little is increased.
Therefore,
the Path of Heaven
reduced surplus to make up for scarcity;
the way
of mankind's Ego
reduces scarcity and pays tribute to surplus!
Who
is there who can have a surplus
and take from it to pay tribute to Heaven?

Surely, only one who is on the Path.
For
this reason, Sages transact, but do not hoard,
complete their work but do
not dwell upon it.
In this way, they have no desire to display their 'worth.'

Nature's
way of doing

Is like the bending of a bow

For pulling on a bow you see

The low go high and the high go low

Nature
takes from those who have

And gives to those who lack

When nature takes from human beings

They fight to get it back

But
if you see you have it all

You're not afraid to give away

Expecting nothing in return

It all comes back with no delay

PERHAPS the Way of Heaven may be likened to the

stretching of a composite bow! The upper part is

depressed, while the lower is raised. If the bow-string is

too long, it is cut short: if too short, it is added to.

The Way of Heaven diminishes the more-than-

enough to supply the less-than-enough. The way of

man is different: it takes from the less-than-enough to

swell the more-than-enough. Who except a man of

the Tao can put his superabundant riches to the

service of the world?

Therefore, the Sage does his work without setting

any store by it, accomplishes his task without dwelling

upon it. He does not want his merits to be seen.

The way of nature is much like the drawing of a bow.

That which is high is lowered, and that which is low is brought up.

The excess is removed, and where there is deficiency more is added.

The way of nature is to reduce the excesses and spread them to where there is deficiency.

The way of the world is otherwise, Mans way is to take from those who have little, and give to those who have much.

Who is it that can offer more to the world, and have still more to offer? Only the person of the Tao.

Therefore the sage acts without laying claim to the act.

He can accomplish without boasting.

He has no wish to appear superior.

The Tao of Heaven works in the world

like the drawing of a bow.

The top is bent downward;

the bottom is bent up.

The excess is taken from,

and the deficient is given to.

The
Tao works to use the excess,

and gives to that which is depleted.

The way of people is to take from the depleted,

and give to those who already have an excess.

Who
is able to give to the needy from their excess?

Only someone who is following the way of the Tao.

This
is why the Master gives

expecting nothing in return.

She does not dwell on her past accomplishments,

and does not glory in any praise.

Natural events are cyclical, always changing from one extreme toward an opposite.

Imagine a bow and arrow. As the archer draws the bow, the two tips of the bow, which were far apart, come close together; the narrow space between string and wood becomes wide; the bow string, which was at rest, becomes taut.

When the archer releases the arrow, once again the process reverses itself, as the tension relaxes.

That is the way of inner nature: to relax what is tense, to fill what is empty, to reduce what is overflowing.

But a society based on materialism and the conquest of nature works to overcome these cycles. If some is good, more must be better, and an absolute glut seems best. At the same time, those who have little get even less.

The wise leader follows the natural order of events and does not take the consumer society for a model.

By serving others and being generous, the leader knows abundance. By being selfless, the leader helps others realize themselves. By being a disinterested facilitation, unconcerned with praise or pay, the leader becomes potent and successful.

The leader's behaviour works because it is based on an understanding of opposites and cycles.

Effective behaviour only seems backwards.

The Tao of Heaven is like the stringing of a bow.

The high is pressed down and the low is raised up.

The string that is too long is shortened

and the string that is too short is added to.

Heaven's Way is to take from what has too much

And give it to what does not have enough.

This is not the way of men, however,

For they take from those who have little

To increase the wealth of the rich.

So who is it that has too much

and offers it to a needy World?

Only someone who knows the Tao.

Therefore, the Sage works anonymously.

She achieves great things

But does not wait around for praise.

She does not want her talents to attract attention to her.

The
harmony of Infinity functions like

a bow and its string.

The upper part bends down,

the lower part raises up.

If the string is too long, it is made shorter;

too short and it is lengthened.

The
nature of Infinity is balance,

excess gravitates to what is lacking.

The tendency of people is toward confusion

because those who have much

take from those who have little.

Those
who are at one with Infinity and

live in peace and harmony

are not confused.

They do not accumulate what

they do not need

and are like a reservoir to those

who

are impoverished.

The
sage lives in harmony

giving without expecting,

completing her tasks with indifference,

and maintaining a oneness with all things.

Heaven's Way is like bending a bow.

The High are lowered and the Low are raised.

The excess is diminished, and the deficiency is repaired.

Heavens way is to reduce the excess and repair the deficiency.

Man's way is not correct,

to decrease the deficient and increase the excessive.

Whoever can accumulate excess should offer it to the World.

This is the only Way.

Thus does the wise man govern and not exploit,

accomplish the results and not remain.

It is not his desire to be considered Wise.

The Way of Heaven is like the drawing of a bow.

What is high is brought lower, and what is low is brought higher.1

What is too long is shortened;

What is too short is lengthened.2

The Way of Heaven is to take away from what is excessive

And to replenish what is deficient.

But the Way of Man is different:

It takes away from those who have little,

And gives to those who already have plenty.

Who is able to offer the world whatever he has in excess?

Only the man of Tao.

Therefore the Sage works without claiming reward,

Accomplishes without taking credit.

He has no desire to display his excellence.

1. i.e. when the string of a bow is drawn back, the top of the bow, as it bends, is pulled down (to some extent) and the bottom of the bow is pulled up. This simile is meant to illustrate the way Heaven makes things equal, and evens things out.

2. The simile is continued by referring to the string of the bow. If it is too long it must be shortened, and vice versa.

The way of Heaven is like the opening of the bow,

Which flats the high, lifts the low,

Reduces the surplus, and compensates for losses.

The way of Heaven cuts the superfluous

To compensate the meager.

The way of Mankind cuts the meager

To add to the superfluous.

Who can have more than enough to provide for the world?

Only the ones who are good at keeping the Way.

Therefore, the wise person does but occupies nothing,

Achieves but does not feel successful,

Because he/she does not want to be praised as a sage.

Heaven's Way is like the stringing of a bow: It pulls down what is high it lifts up what is low it takes away from what has an abundance to give to what has not enough.

Heaven's Way: Take away from what has an abundance help along what has not enough. People's way is not like this: Take away from what has not enough to offer it to what has an abundance.

Who can have an abundance to offer the world? Only the one who has Tao.

And so the Wise Person: Works but does not rely on this achieves successes but does not dwell in them has no desire to show off his worth.

Let the Life of the Primordial Tao be an example for us.

He who does violence to people, humiliates and robs them — opposes Tao.

But he who never acts selfishly, who gives his surplus to others, who performs deeds not for the sake of glory, who lives with calm, without worldly passions, who submerges into tender and subtle calm of Tao and helps deserving people on this Path — such a person becomes similar to Tao.

The Tao Way is like a stretched bow,

The extremities will lower when the middle rises.

What is in excess diminishes, what is little rises.

The Tao Way takes from where there is excess,

And does add wherever there is shortage.

But
the ordinary human way it is such that it,

Takes from where is shortage,

And gives to whoever has already abundance.

How then the mankind could be happy?

But
the Wise Person knows that he does not own anything truly,

Whatever surplus he has is given to the people, without expectations.

Working without pride, he is a living proof.

The
Dao of Heaven (i.e., the process of the universe) is like the drawing of a bow---the
high end [of the bow] is pulled down and the low end is pulled up. What has
an excess is depleted and what is inadequate is augmented. The Dao of Heaven
works to deplete whatever has an excess and to augment whatever is inadequate.
The dao of human beings is not this way. It depletes what is already inadequate
to present to what already has an excess. Who can have a surplus to present
to the world? Only those who have the Dao. For that reason the Sage acts without
exacting gratitude. When his accomplishments are made he does not dwell on them,
such is his unwillingness to manifest his worthiness.

Perhaps the Tao of heaven resembles the drawing of a bow.

When it is high, lower it.

When low, raise it.

When excessive, diminish it.

When deficient, replenish it.

The Tao of heaven diminishes the excessive and replenishes the deficient.

The Tao of man is not so - while decreasing the deficient, it supplies the excessive.

Who can supply the world with overabundance?

Only the man with Tao.

Therefore the Sage acts without exalting his ability.

He achieves without dwelling upon it.

He does not want to display his superiority.

Directing the Power

The Tao in Nature

Is like a bow that is stretched.

The top is pulled down,

The bottom is raised up.

What is excessive is reduced,

What is insufficient is supplemented.

The Tao in Nature

Reduces the excessive

And supplements the insufficient.

The Tao in Man is not so;

He reduces the insufficient,

Because he serves the excessive.

Who then can use excess to serve the world?

Those who possess the Tao.

Therefore Evolved Individuals

Act without expectation,

Succeed without taking credit,

And have no desire to display their excellence.

The rich have too much and the poor do not have enough. Balance the scales, but don't take the credit.

Is not God's Way much like a bow well bent?

The upper part has been disturbed, pressed down;

The lower part is raised up from its place;

The slack is taken up; the slender width

Is broader drawn; for thus the Way of God

Cuts people down when they have had too much,

And fills the bowls of those who are in want.

But not the way of man will work like this:

The people who have not enough are spoiled

For tribute to the rich and surfeited.

Who
can benefit the world

From stored abundance of his own?

He alone who has the Way,

The Wise Man who can act apart

And not depend on others' whims;

But not because of his high rank

Will he succeed; he does not wish

To flaunt superiority.

Does not he Way (Tao) of Heaven resemble drawing a bow (and aiming an arrow at the target)?

When it is high, it will be brought down;

When it is low, it will be raised up;

When it is overfull, it will be diminished;

And when it is not full, it will be supplemented.

It is the Way of Heaven to diminish the excessive, so as to supplement the deficient.

This is not so with the Way of man -

It takes away from those who have not enough so as to supply those who have superabundance.

Who can supply all the people under Heaven by diminishing the excessive?

Only the man who has "Tao."

Therefore the sage promotes all things, but does not think the effort as his own,

Achieves merit, but does not claim credit for himself,

And does not wish to parade his wisdom and ability.

The Dao of Heaven, is it not like when a bow is pulled?

As the high end gets pulled down, the low end gets pulled up: so those who have more than enough are diminished, and those who have less than enough get augmented.

The Dao of Heaven diminishes those who have more than enough and augments those who have less than enough, but the Dao of man is not like this,

For it diminishes those who have less than enough in order to give to those who have more than enough.

Who can take his more than enough and give it to all under Heaven?

It is only one who has the Dao.

Thus it is that the sage acts, yet they [the people] do not depend on him, and he achieves success yet takes no pride in it, for he does not want to appear as a worthy [xian].

1. The Way of Heaven is like the flexing of a bow.

2. The high it presses down; the low it raises up.

3. From those with a surplus it takes away; to those without enough it adds
on.

4. Therefore the way of Heaven—

5. Is to reduce the excessive and increase the insufficient;

6. The Way of Man—

7. Is to reduce the insufficient and offer more to the excessive.

8. Now, who is able to have a surplus and use it to offer to Heaven?

9. Clearly, it's only the one who possesses the Way.

10. Therefore the Sage—

11. Take actions but does not possess them;

12. Accomplishes his tasks but does not dwell on them.

13. Like this, is his desire not to make a display of his worthiness.

Lao Tzu said
using Tao

was like pulling on a bowstring:

The top bends down,

the bottom bends up,

and all the energy

is focused in the middle.

Tao takes energy
from where it is,

and sends it where it needs to be.

But most people take from those

who don't have enough,

so those who have too much already

can have more.

So who in this
world

is truly generous to others?

People who are in touch with Tao.

They do their work

without taking credit.

They get the job done and move on.

They aren't interested in showing off.

Taking and Giving

The Way of heaven is like bending a bow.

The high is lowered; the low is raised.

The excessive is reduced; the deficient is increased.

The Way of heaven takes from those who have too much

and gives to those who do not have enough.

The human way is different.

It takes from those who do not have enough

and gives to those who have too much.

Who has more than enough to give to the world?

Only the person of the Way.

Therefore the wise act but do not rely on their own ability.

They accomplish the task but claim no credit.

They have no desire to seem superior.

The way of heaven is like that of an archer:

Without tension he draws his bow so that above approaches below.

He avoids what is unnecessary the ego-effort.

Releasing the arrow he lets the Tao-power take over.

Likeness of heaven whose equanimity equalizes all things.

The way of men is different:

Greedily they increase want and lock abundance out.

The Sage instead possessing Tao accomplishes his work bringing completion to all.

Because he does not hold and retain anything he become a vessel of abundance.

Because he wants to be only a mediator he becomes the center of everything.

Bending The Bow

Lao Tze says,

May not the way of Heaven be compared to bending a bow?

The upper end is where Heaven presses down, and the bottom end is where Heaven lifts up.

So the extra length is shortened;

the insufficient width is expanded.

It is the way of Heaven to reduce from those that have too much, and increase to those that have not enough.

It is not so with the way of Man.

He takes away from those who have not enough to add to those that have too much.

Who can have too much and spare to give to the entire world?

Only he who is enlightened in the Tao.

Therefore the sage works without claiming his endeavor.

He achieves his task and does not rest arrogantly in it.

For he does not wish to display his superiority.

THE WAY OF THE TAO

The
Tao is as supple as a bow;

the high made lower, and the lowly raised.

It shortens the string which has been stretched,

and lengthens that which has become too short.

It
is the way of the Tao to take from those

who have a surplus to what they need,

providing for those without enough.

The way of the ordinary person,

is not the way of the Tao,

for such people take from those who are poor

and give to those who are rich.

The
sage knows that his possessions are none,

therefore he gives to the world;

without recognition, doing his work.

In this way he accomplishes

that which is required of him;

without dwelling upon it in any way,

he gives of his wisdom without display.

As it acts in the world, the Tao

is like the bending of a bow.

The top is bent downward;

the bottom is bent up.

It adjusts excess and deficiency

so that there is perfect balance.

It takes from what is too much

and give to what isn't enough.

Those who try to control,

who use force to protect their power,

go against the direction of the Tao.

They take from those who don't have enough

and give to those who have far too much.

The Master can keep giving

because there is no end to her wealth.

She acts without expectation,

succeeds without taking credit,

and doesn't think that she is better

than anyone else.

Is not the law of Nature like aiming with a bow?

It brings down the high and lifts up the low;

reduces the excessive, drawing strength;

and increases insufficient, drawing strength.

So that the law of Nature is to diminish the excess and supply the want.

But the way of Man is not so:

He robs the poor and serves the rich!

Who can give his excessive possessions to serve the world?

The man who possesses Dao.

Thus a Sage ruler provided everything but did not take anything.

He accomplished deeds but did not claim them.

That is, he did not display his sagacity.

The Tao of heaven is like drawing a bow.

The high bends down,

The low rises up.

The surplus decreases,

Insufficiency is supplied.

So the Tao of heaven reduces what is surplus and enhances what is insufficient.

The human Tao reduces what is insufficient and caters to the surplus.

Who can use the surplus to benefit the heaven?

Only those who possess Tao.

So the sage

Exists without ownership,

Accomplishes without holding on.

It is thus, without desire, that the wise see.

LXXVII

The
way is like the bending of a bow

To achieve its ends the top must bend down and the bottom rise up

It takes from that which has much, adds to that which has little

And keeps a still, quiet center

Men,
however, always seek to add more, regardless of their place

How can anything be accomplished that way?

The taoist way is to pull the bowstring and let it go

Accomplish the task and move on to the next

Doing is profit enough

The Way of Heaven

The Way of heaven

is like drawing a bow:

the high is lowered,

the low is raised;

excess is reduced,

need is fulfilled.

The Way of heaven

reduces excess and fills need,

but the way of humans is not so:

they strip the needy

to serve those who have too much.

Tao of Nature is like tensing the string of a bow.

The high parts of the string comes down, the low parts lift up.

If it is too long, then we cut out excessive part.

If it is too short, then we add some.

It is Tao of Nature that excessive part is reduced and insufficient part is supplemented.

But Tao of People is opposite.

The poor become poorer.

The rich become richer.

Only those who have Te can donate their surplus to the world.

This is why sages work but do not force their way, and succeed but do not glorify their merits.

It is their modesty that is wise.

Is the Way of Heaven similar to a stretched bow?

The upper part is pressed down, while the lower is raised.

The overfull part is reduced, the deficient part is supplemented.

The Way of Heaven is to reduce what is overfull and to supplement what is deficient.

The way of man is different: it reduces what is deficient and supplements what is overfull.

Who, except the man of the Way, can put his excessive riches to the service of the world?

Therefore, the sage does his work without saying it is done by him, accomplishes his task without dwelling upon it.

He does not want his merits to be seen.

The Tao of heaven is like the art of archery,

tall man, aim low;

short man, aim high.

If the string is too long, shorten it;

not enough, lengthen it.

The Tao of heaven is just like that,

short the long, long the short.

Man's way is different.

He takes from those who do not have enough,

to give to those who already have too much.

Who can have anything left for taking?

Only the man of Tao, as sage,

works without taking,

achieves without keeping,

does not show his greatness.

The way of heaven is like the bending of a bow.

The high end is pulled down and the low end is raised up.

The excessive is dirninished

and the deficient is supplemented.

It
is the way of heaven to take where there is too much

in order to give where there is not enough.

The way of people is otherwise.

They take where there is not enough

in order to increase where there is already too much.

Who will take from their own excesses

and give to all under heaven?

Only those who hold to the Tao.

Therefore,
the True Person benefits yet expects no reward,

does the work and moves on.

There is no desire to be considered better than others.

The
way of the universe

is like

pulling the string of a bow

the bow bends

the top descends

the bottom ascends.

The way of the universe is

to take from the wealthy

and give to the poor.

The way of humanity is

to take from the poor

and give to the wealthy.

There
is only one way that a person can have so much

that there is enough to give to poor and wealthy alike.

How?

By following the way,

directing but never with force,

accomplishing but never praised,

better than others

but unknown.

Heaven's way is like the bending of a bow. When a bow is bent the top comes
down and the bottom-end comes up.

So too could heaven take away from those who have too much, and give to those
that have not enough. Take away from those that have too much and give to those
that have not enough.

But this is far from man's way. He takes away from those that have not enough
to offer those who already have too much.

The man of dao can fool enough and spare, and next give to the whole world.

So the wise man acts, but doesn't possess, accomplishes but lays claim to no
credit.

If he accomplishes a task, achieves an aim, he doesn't wish to reveal himself
as better than others. So he seems to claim no credit. He seems to have no wish
to appear superior, no desire to display excellence.

The Way of heaven is like the bending of a bow -

the upper part is pressed down,

the lower part is raised up,

the part that has too much is reduced,

the part that has too little is increased.

Therefore,

The Way of heaven

reduces surplus to make up for scarcity;

The Way of man

reduces scarcity and pays tribute to surplus.

Who is there that can have a surplus and take from it to pay tribute to heaven?

Surely only one who has the Way!

For this reason,

The sage

acts but does not possess,

completes his work but does not dwell on it.

In this fashion,

he has no desire to display his worth.

Like the bending of an archer's bow is the Tao of Heaven!

It brings down that which is high, and raises up that which is depressed.

It takes away where there is excess, and gives where there is deficiency.

The Tao of Heaven makes all things equal.

This Tao is not of man.

Man takes from the needy to add to his own excess.

Who is he that, having a superabundance, can bring it to the service of the world?

Only he who has the Tao.

This is why the wise man acts without expectation of reward, and completes his task without claiming merit.

For thus he hides his wealth.

Bring Balance

Let your souls unite as your bodies blend

in the intimacy of love,

but also let your spirits walk

in solitude and silence.

Balance in a relationship is not static,

like a counterbalanced scale.

It is dynamic like a spinning gyroscope,

or a leaping twirling dance.

Yin and yang,

you and me,

give and take,

together and alone

are each part of the Tao.

Opposite energies each have their place.

Too much attention can be smothering.

Too little may feel like abandonment.

Is it time for physical passion,

or gentle conversation?

Time to be together, or to be alone?

You must learn to sense these rhythms

and allow them to have their time.

Which is needed at this moment in your life?

Heaven's Way is indeed like the bending of a bow. When (the string) is
high, bring it down. When it is low, raise it up. When it is excessive,
reduce it. When it is insufficient, supplement it.

The Way of Heaven reduces whatever is excessive and supplements
whatever in insufficient. The way of man is different. It reduces the
insufficient to offer to the excessive.

Who is able to have excess to offer to the world? Only the man of Tao.

Therefore the sage acts, but does not rely on his own ability. He
accomplishes his task, but does not claim credit for it. He has no
desire to display his excellence.

Is not existence

Like a drawn bow?

The ends approach,

The height shortens, the narrowness widens.

True living would take from those with too much

Enough for those with too little,

Whereas man exacts from those with too little

Still more for those with too much.

Now what man shall have wealth enough to share with all men

Save one who can freely draw from the common means?

A sane man needs no better support, no richer reward,

Than this common means,

Through which he is all men's equal.

Isn't the law of heavens like using a bow and arrow?

When it is aimed too high, it is lowered; when it is aimed too low, it is raised;

When it is aimed too far, it is loosened; when it is aimed too close, it is tightened.

The law of the heavens is to reduce the wealthy and give to the needy.

But the law of present-day people is just the opposite: they take from the needy to give to the wealthy.

Who can contribute the surplus to the needy?

Only the people who follow the DAO.

So the great men do not do things for themselves and do not claim credit when things are accomplished.

They just do not want to show their goodness.

The Way of Heaven is like the bending of a bow.

The upper is lowered, while the lower is raised.

The too long is shortened, while the too short is lengthened.

The Way of Heaven is the way of balance:

Take from that which has more

and give to that which has less.

The way of man is different:

Take from those who have less

and give to those who have more.

Who is so abundant that he can continue to give to the world?

Only the man who embodies the Tao and is thus inexhaustible.

Therefore, the sage, being the fulcrum of the world,

Benefits his people without proclaiming it,

Accomplishes his task without dwelling on it,

Enlightens his world without flaunting his wisdom.

The way of Heaven is like the opening of the bow,

Which flats the high, lifts the low,

Reduces the surplus, and compensates for losses.

The way of Heaven cuts the superfluous

To compensate the meager.

The way of Mankind cuts the meager

To add to the superfluous.

Who can have more than enough to provide for the world?

Only the ones who are good at keeping the Way.

Therefore, the wise person does but occupies nothing,

Achieves but does not feel successful,

Because he/she does not want to be praised as a sage.

The way of nature is much like the drawing of a bow.

That which is high is lowered, and that which is low is brought up.

The excess is removed, and where there is deficiency more is added.

The way of nature is to reduce the excesses and spread them to where there is deficiency.

The way of the world is otherwise, Mans way is to take from those who have little, and give to those who have much.

Who is it that can offer more to the world, and have still more to offer? Only the person of the Tao.

Therefore the sage acts without laying claim to the act.

He can accomplish without boasting.

He has no wish to appear superior.

