===== Chapter 74 =====

People do not fear death

[But] how can [one possibly] endure

[If one] uses death to frighten them?

Suppose the people are made ever to fear death

And that those who act out of the ordinary

I seize, detain, and kill.

Who would dare [to do this]?

Frequently, there those chief executioners who are killed.

Those who take the place of the chief executioners are [also] killed.

This is called usurping the Master Carpenter.

[Among] those who usurp the Master Carpenter

There are few who do not cut their hands.

If people do not fear death, How dare you threaten them with death?

But if people with a normal fear of death Are about to do something
vicious, And I could seize and execute them, Who would dare?

There is always an official executioner. Trying to take the
executioner's place, Is like trying to replace a master woodworker - Few
would not slice their own hands.

If people have no fear of death

It's pointless to threaten them with it.

If people were in constant fear of death,

And if anyone acting deviously

Were to be seized and executed,

Who would dare to do so?

The Master Executioner is always there to kill.

If you attempt to play his role

It is like trying to do the work of a master lumberjack.

The one who has no skill to do this work

Seldom escapes with his hands unhurt.

PENALTY OF DEATH

Should the people have no fear of death,

Threatening them with such a penalty,

Is the essence of futility.

Should the people fear death,

Be there any among them who would commit a crime,

Knowing death to be the penalty ?

Who then, is comfortable as the executioner ?

Is not nature the wisest judge regarding timeliness for one to die ?

To otherwise kill in defiance of nature

is to be as an apprentice carpenter performing complicated hewing for his master.

In performing a task unsuited to his natural level of skill,

He is certain to be injured.

If people are not afraid to die, why would you use death to threaten them?

If you make people constantly fear death, and seize the dishonest ones and kill them, who would dare to do the killing?

An official would do the killing.

The one who kills is like the person who takes the place of the great artisan who created the universe.

Whomever takes the place of this great artisan rarely escapes injuring their own hand!

A RESTRAINT OF MISUNDERSTANDING

The people have no fear of death; why then seek to awe them by the threat

of death? If the people feared death and I could put to death evil-doers,

who would dare to offend?

There
is one appointed to inflict death. He who would usurp that position

resembleth a hewer of wood doing the work of a carpenter. Such an one,

presumptuous, will be sure to cut his own hands.

The people do not fear death; to what purpose is it to (try to) frightenthem with death? If the people were always in awe of death, and I couldalways seize those who do wrong, and put them to death, who would dareto do wrong? There is always One who presides over the infliction of death.He who would inflict death in the room of him who so presides over it maybe described as hewing wood instead of a great carpenter. Seldom is itthat who undertakes the hewing, instead of the great carpenter, does notcut his own hands!

When people no longer fear death

How can one threaten them with it?

But if people are afraid of death and other people threaten to kill them

When they infringe upon the law

Well, who is still going to break the law?

But there is only One who commands life and death

Since people started to decide about life and death themselves

They have actually taken a place on that One's chair

Then they behave like sorcerer's apprentices

Who assault the works of their master,

With disastrous consequences for themselves

It is futile to threaten people with death. If they are not afraid to die, they cannot be frightened by the death penalty; and if they are afraid to die, why should we kill them?

Only Nature knows the proper time for a man to die. To kill is to interrupt Nature's design for dying, Like a blundering apprentice judging himself to be wiser than his master.

Whenever an apprentice thinks he is smarter than his master, he is very likely to hurt himself.

The people are not frightened of death.

What then is the use of trying to intimidate them with the death-penalty?

And even supposing people were generally frightened of death

And did not regard it as an everyday thing,

Which of us would dare to seize them and slay them?

There is the Lord of Slaughter always ready for this task,

And to do it in his stead is like thrusting oneself into the master-carpenter's place

And doing his chipping for him.

Now "he who tries to do the master-carpenter's chipping for him is lucky if he does not cut his hand."

If people are not afraid of death,

why threaten them with death?

If people are in constant fear of death,

and if being unruly means you will be killed,

who would dare be unruly?

Who would dare kill him?

There is always a lord of death.

Trying to do his job is like

taking the place of an artisan.

He who tries to carve like a master carpenter

rarely avoids being cut.

(If) the people do not fear death

Then why use death to intimidate them?

Suppose it were so that the people always feared death

And still they behaved perversely

(When) we seized, detained and executed them

Who would be bold?

There will always be a master executioner to do the killing

Now to take the place of the master executioner

& do the killing

May be likened to taking the place of the master carpenter

in hewing

Now (of) those who take the place of the master carpenter

in hewing

Few indeed will not harm their own hands!

Tyranny

If the people were constant in their behaviour

and yet did not fear to die,

How could you use execution to threaten them?

If you brought it about that the people

were constant in their behaviour

en moreover feared to die,

And we took those who behaved in abnormal ways

and killed them -

Who would dare act in this way?

If the people are constant and moreover necessarily fear to die,

Then we constantly have one in charge of executions.

Now killing people in place of the one in charge of executions,

This is like cutting wood in place of the master carpenter.

And of those who cut wood in the place of the master carpenter, only few do not hurt their hands.

If people don't love life, they won't fear death, and threatening them with it won't work.

If people have lives worth living, then the threat of death is meaningful, and they'll do what is right to avoid it.

But killing itself should be the province of the great executioner alone. Trying to take his place and kill is like cutting wood in the place of the master carpenter: The odds are you'll hurt your own hand.

People don't truly fear death,

But they do fear being threatened with it.

When people's fears are thus enlivened,

It is a crime of intimidation-inner murder.

But it is the criminal thought, and not the man,

Who must be caught and killed.

There may always be those who use death to further power,

But they are not to be opposed.

For they would usurp the place of the Cosmic Artisan,

And try to do the work of Nature

Without the ability to use its tools.

Thus, the pretenders will but seldom fail

To shed the blood of their own incompetence.

Capital Punishment

If
the people do not fear death,

why threaten them with it?

If
the people do fear death,

and if the unlawful be killed,

who would dare to execute them?

Only
the Supreme Executioner kills.

To
take His place is to set an unskilled man

to wield the hatchet of the master carpenter:

he rarely escapes chopping off his own hand!

Why use death as a deterrent, when the people have no fear of death?

Even supposing they shrank from death as from a monster, and by playing on their terror I could slay them, should I dare?

There is one who inflicts sentence of death. To usurp his functions and to kill would be to assume the role of Master-Carpenter. There are few who can act as Master-Carpenter without cutting their hands.

When the people are not afraid of death, what use is it to frighten them with the punishment of death? If the people were constantly afraid of death and we could arrest and kill those who commit treacheries, who then would commit such? Only the Supreme Executioner kills. To kill in place of the Supreme Executioner is to hack instead of a great carpenter. Now if one hacks in place of a great carpenter one can scarcely avoid cutting one's own hand.

Controlling Feelings

When the people are not afraid off death

For what reason would you use death to frighten them?

If you cause the people to constant fear of death

And yet those who deem: act deviantly, we take, hold and kill them,

who will dare do it?

Should we constant having a professional executor do the killing?

To delegate a professional executor for killing,

Is this called "delegating the great carpenter to chop"?

Those who delegate the great carpenter to chop are few.

It doesn't hurt his hand.

Men are no longer afraid to die.

Why should we frighten them with dying?

If men were still as afraid of death as they used to be,

We could catch a criminal and put him to death.

Who would have the courage to commit a crime?

(In nature), there is always one who is responsible for ending the life of man.

If we take over the responsibility of killing,

It is just like taking over the great lumberjack's work of cutting wood.

If we take over the great lumberjack's work of cutting,

We can hardly help but hurt our hands.

If people are not afraid of death,

why threaten them with death to prevent them from committing a crime?

When people are afraid of death,

there are still those who are not afraid of it,

who will dare to commit a crime, and so why arrest and execute them?

There is an official executioner who is in charge of execution.

To kill on behalf of the executioner is like carving wood on behalf of the carpenter.

Those who cut wood on behalf of the carpenter can seldom escape from hurting their own hand.

If the majority of people do not fear death,

Why use killing to intimidate them?

If the majority of people do fear death,

Those who act perversely -

I can arrest and kill them.

Who would dare then?

The Executioner is always the one in charge of killing;

To kill in place of the Executioner

Is to chop wood in place of a master carpenter.

To chop wood in place of a master carpenter,

One can hardly avoid injuring one's own hand.

When people do not fear death,

What is the use of frightening them with the death penalty?

When people are constantly afraid of death,

And we can arrest and execute criminals,

Who would dare to commit crimes?

Only the executioner kills.

To kill instead of the executioner is like a woodcutter taking a master-carpenter's place.

When someone carves instead of the master-carpenter,

He can usually expect to injure his hand.

When the people are not afraid of death, wherefore frighten them with death?

Were the people always afraid of death, and were I able to arrest and put to
death those who innovate, then who would dare?

There is a regular executioner whose charge it is to kill.

To kill on behalf of the executioner is what is described as chopping wood on
behalf of the master carpenter.

In chopping wood on behalf of the master carpenter, there are few who escape
hurting their own hands instead.

Overcome Delusion

If the people do not fear death, how can they be frightened by death? If we make people fear death, and supposing some would [still] venture to rebel, if we seize them for capital punishment, who will dare?

There is always an executioner who kills. Now to take the place of the executioner who kills is taking the place of the great carpenter who hews. If a man takes the place of the great carpenter who hews, he will rarely, indeed, fail to injure his hand.

Death is a natural part of life, and it is your fate. If you accept this fully, there is no fear. Having no fear, your actions are powerful. If you try to manage your life, you won't live. Because of death there is no risk, hence nothing to manage. A life based on death will be fulfilling. A life based on life will lead to death.

When the populace are unafraid of death, what good is threatening them with death?

When the populace are afraid to die, hold devious ones and put them to death.

After that, who dares?

The official executioner is always there to do executions.

Doing executions by anyone else is like felling trees by other than an arborist.

A non-arborist, in felling trees, is unlikely not to hurt his hands.

In their misery, the people no longer fear death, so how can you threaten them even with death?

Let the people fear death always,

then if we seize those who follow sinister ways

and put them to death,

no one will dare live such lives.

The Executioner's killing is perennial, it's true.

But to undertake the killing yourself -

that's like trying to carve lumber for a master carpenter.

Try to carve lumber for a master carpenter

and you'll soon have blood on your hands.

When the people are not afraid to die

Why then threaten them with death?

Even if they normally are fearful of death,

For worst offenders, we may seize and kill them.

But who dares to execute?

There is always an expert executioner who kills.

Substituting for an expert executioner,

Is like hacking wood in place of a master carpenter.

Whoever substitutes for the master carpenter,

He seldom escapes injury of his own hand.

When
people lack respect for death

How does it happen that death looks threatening?

Suppose people entirely respect death

Yet there are those who act strange.

I may obtain hold of them yet who would venture to be killing them?

Entireness
possesses that which is the master killer, killing.

In the end taking the place

Of that which is the master killer, killing

Is appropriately called

Taking the place of the great carpenter, carving.

In
the end take the place of the great carpenter, carving

It is rarely true that a lack of wounding the hand goes with this.

If the people do not fear death, what is the good of trying to control them by the threat of death?

If they fear death, then only capture and execute those who cause disorder, turning the others away from doing likewise. (The legalists who are lavish with the death penalty and believe it will sort everything out, are therefore wrong).

The servant of death (heaven), kills, (let him do it. Let us not do his work. He alone is capable of it). The man who wants to kill may end up like those who play with the carpenter's tools, and often lose a finger in their play.

People do not fear death

How can they be threatened with death?

If people are made to constantly fear death

Then those who act unlawfully

I can capture and kill them

Who would dare?

There exists a master executioner that kills

If we substitute for the master executioner to kill

It is like substituting for the great carpenter to cut

Those who substitute for the great carpenter to cut

It is rare that they do not hurt their own hands

People seem to have no fear of death, so how can they be scared by the threat of execution? Wouldn't it be futile for us to use death as a deterrent?

If, for the sake of argument, we say that people have a constant fear of death, and we capture and kill anyone who acts in a strange and unlawful manner, then who would dare to be an outlaw?

(But since there are still many outlaws, it does look as if the death penalty - capital punishment - is not very effective!)

There is a master executioner who is always present. Call it Karma, or Nature, or the Law of Reciprocity. This executioner is perfectly impartial and never fails to dispense the appropriate punishment, including death.

There is no need for human beings to assume the role of this master executioner, to enact what they perceive to be justice. Trying to do so is similar to a novice trying to cut wood like an expert carpenter.

When novices clumsily pretend to be masters of wood cutting, it would be rare for them to not accidentally cut their own hands. Similarly, those who think they can kill on behalf of the master executioner would likely end up harming themselves.

(Thus, a society that avidly supports capital punishment hurts itself. Aside from the observation that the death penalty doesn't seem effective, we should also consider the possibility that innocents may be executed by mistake - and certainly those who are killed can no longer make amends and repay their debt to society.)

Notes

The concept of the "master executioner" in this chapter is a continuation of the "heavenly net" concept from the previous chapter. They are different ways to describe the same karmic mechanism that seems to pervade reality.

At first glance, this chapter appears to be directed at the ruler. Whenever we see this in the Tao Te Ching, we know that the teaching operates on multiple levels. Not only is it a social commentary, but it is also a recommendation on how we can conduct our lives.

The central idea is that the negative approach is rarely effective. The use of the death penalty does not necessarily improve society. If we execute everyone on death row today, we would feel no safer tomorrow. The more we resort to killing as a response to our frustration and anger with violence, the more violent society becomes.

Similarly, the use of threats and punishment is far less effective than positive reinforcement in the Tao of interpersonal relationships. Thus, sages do not criticize or accuse. Instead, they guide and nurture through sincere praise and approval.

The lesson also applies to the ruling of one's inner kingdom. While it is important for us to recognize our past mistakes, it is futile for us to dwell on them and beat ourselves up. Blaming ourselves will not move us closer to our goals. Proactive, positive actions will do a far better job of that.

OVERCOMING DELUSIONS

If the people do not fear death, how can one frighten them with death? If we teach people to fear death, then when one rebels he can be seized and executed; after that who will dare to rebel?

There is always an officer to execute a murderer, but if one takes the place of the executioner, it is like taking the place of a skilled carpenter at his hewing. If one takes the place of the skilled carpenter he is liable to cut himself. (Therefore do not interfere with Tao.)

The people do not fear death,

Why threaten them with death?

Suppose the people always fear death,

One who does strange things (ch'i),

I shall seize and kill,

Then who dares [to do strange things]?

Killing is carried out by the executioner.

To replace the executioner and kill,

Is like chopping wood in place of the master carpenter.

To chop wood in place of the master carpenter,

Rarely one does not hurt one's own hand.

Capital Punishment

If the people do not fear death, why threaten them with it? If the people do fear death, and if the unlawful be killed, who would dare to execute them? Only the Supreme Executioner kills. To take his place is to set an unskilled man to wield the hatchet of a master carpenter: he rarely escapes chopping off his own hand!

If people do not fear death,

then you cannot threaten them with it.

If they are afraid of death,

we could make death the penalty for breaking the law.

But do we dare to do so?

Consider the role of the official executioner:

Are you ready to play that role?

When amateurs try to play the master carpenter,

they usually cut and bruise themselves in the process.

Seventy-four

If men are not afraid to die,

It is no avail to threaten them with death.

If men live in constant fear of dying,

And if breaking the law means that a man will be killed,

Who will dare to break the law?

There
is always an official executioner.

If you try to take his place,

It is like trying to be a master carpenter and cutting wood.

If you try to cut wood like a master carpenter, you will only hurt your hand.

When the people are not afraid of death,

What is the point of threatening them with death?

Should the people really fear death,

Who dare go against laws

If we put to death those who do evils?

It is the duty of a regular executioner to kill,

If one wants to kill on behalf of the executioner,

It is like chopping wood on behalf of the master carpenter.

There are few who can escape cutting their own hands

When they chop wood on behalf of the master carpenter.

When the people do not fear death,

How can you frighten them with death?

Suppose the people do always fear death,

And we can seize and kill

Those who are lawless.

But who would dare to do so?

There is always the one who administers killings, and he does the killing.

If you do the killing, taking his place,

This is called hewing wood taking the place of the master-carpenter.

If you hew wood taking the place of the master-carpenter,

You will seldom escape injuring your own hand.

If people are not afraid to die, why bother threatening them with death?

If people are afraid of dying, then death penalties should be summarily dished out to criminals.

Consequently, there will be no more offenders.

Normally, Nature usually does the job of the executioner.

If the government tries to do what Nature normally does,

It is akin to the apprentice trying to do the job of the master carpenter.

The apprentice usually ends up cutting his own hand.

Subdue Delusion

Chih Huo

When the people are not afraid of death,

What avails it to scare them with death?

Assuming that they often do fear death,

And that any pervert can be seized and killed,

Who dares to do the killing?

It is the job of the Director of Death to kill.

To take over the job of the Director of Death

Is like wielding the hammer for the master-builder.

He who wields the hammer for the master-builder

Seldom escapes wounding himself in the hand.

If the people do not stand in awe of death,

What is the point of threatening them with the death penalty?

But even suppose the people were in constant fear of death,

Who would dare to seize the evil-doers and slaughter them?

Leave killing to the Great Slayer.

He who usurps the place of the Great Slayer

Is like one who seeks to assist a master joiner with an axe.

Now he who assists a master joiner with an axe

Rarely fails to injure his own hands.

When people don't mind death,

Why threaten them with death?

If, afraid of death, they were still unruly,

Who would dare seize and kill them?

The great executioner kills those who kill.

To take his place is like

Handling the hatchet for a master carpenter.

Whoever handles the hatchet for a master carpenter

Usually gets his hands cut.

If people are not afraid to die, what is the use of threatening them with the punishment of death?

On the other hand,

if people value their lives, and if outlaws are seized and killed or are killed by what they are doing,

who would dare risk a life of peace for the sake of an insecure future?

Yet it is always true that one who takes charge of killing is killed in turn.

To become the executioner of artificial righteousness is like the inexperienced lad who would brandish a sharp axe of a master carpenter.

He can seldom escape cutting himself.

LXXIV.

To
Control Delusion

When
people fear not death, then why

Affright
them with its fear?

If
kept in awe of it could I

Seize
one for some wild deed to die,

And
slay him? Who would dare?

To
slay the slayer stands always

The
executioner,

Now,
if some one his work essays,

And
seeks to slay the one who slays,

That
man is sure to err.

Great
carpenter, we call him, who

To
slay the slayer stands,

And
hewing is his work to do,

Who takes
the hewer s place, to hew,

Is
sure to cut his hands.

If the people do not fear death,

How then can you frighten them by death?

But if you cause the people continually to fear death,

And if one of them becomes a great criminal,

Can you take hold of him and slay him?

Would you dare to this?

There is always one, the Executioner, who kills men.

But, on the contrary, if you kill as if you were Executioner,

It would be as if you tried to do the work of a Master Carpenter.

In attempting to do the work of a Master Carpenter,

Few there be who do not wound their own hands.

When the people

are no longer afraid

of death,

Why scare them

with the spirit

of death?

If you

could make the people

always afraid

of death,

And they still

break the law,

Then you

might arrest

and execute them,

And who

would dare

break the law?

Is not

the Great Executioner

always there to kill?

To do

the killing

for the Great Executioner

Is to chop wood

for a master carpenter,

And you would be lucky indeed

if you

did not

hurt your own hand!

If the people fear death, why frighten them with death?

Even if one could cause the people always to fear death and could seize and kill those who make ingenious things, - who would dare to act thus?

There is always a Chief Executioner who kills. To kill in the place of the Chief Executioner may be called: to chop in the place of the Master Carpenter.

Now in chopping in place of the Master Carpenter, few will escape maiming their hands!

The people do not fear death; to what purpose is it to (try to)

frighten them with death? If the people were always in awe of death,

and I could always seize those who do wrong, and put them to death,

who would dare to do wrong?

There
is always One who presides over the infliction death. He who

would inflict death in the room of him who so presides over it may be

described as hewing wood instead of a great carpenter. Seldom is it

that he who undertakes the hewing, instead of the great carpenter,

does not cut his own hands!

If
there is someone who doesn't fear death,
why threaten to kill them?

If people did fear death
and one were to capture and kill the devious few,

who would dare to be devious?:
if
the people are always at risk of execution,
there will never lack an executioner.

Now,
to kill like an executioner is like-
hacking
at wood, instead of masterful carpentry;
few are there who can escape cutting
their own hands!

You
truly are what isn't born

You need not be afraid to die

Just live your life and know that you

Will never lose the inner eye

You
can't control what is to be

In using tools you don't command

Unlike the master carpenter

You're bound to cut your hand

WHEN the people are no longer afraid of death,

Why scare them with the spectre of death?

If you could make the people always afraid of death,

And they still persisted in breaking the law,

Then you might with reason arrest and execute them,

And who would dare to break the law?

Is not the Great Executor always there to kill?

To do the killing for the Great Executor

Is to chop wood for a master carpenter,

And you would be lucky indeed if you did not hurt your own hand!

When the people are no longer afraid of death, why threaten them with the executioner?

If the people feared death, and execution was imposed as a penalty; who would dare transgress The Law?

Heaven is the Master Executioner.

Whoever tries to take Heavens place is like an amateur trying to use the master carpenters' tools to hew wood,

if he tries to use the tools he will likely hew himself.

If you do not fear death,

then how can it intimidate you?

If you aren't afraid of dying,

there is nothing you can not do.

Those
who harm others

are like inexperienced boys

trying to take the place of a great lumberjack. Trying to fill his shoes will
only get them seriously hurt.

It is not the leader's role to play judge and jury, to punish people for 'bad' behaviour. In the first place, punishment does not effectively control behaviour.

But even if punishment did work, what leader would dare to use fear as a teaching method?

The wise leader knows that there are natural consequences for every act. The task is to shed light on these natural consequences, not to attack the behaviour itself.

If the leader tries to take the place of nature and act as judge and jury, the best you can expect is a crude imitation of a very subtle process.

At the very least, the leader will discover that the instrument of justice cuts both ways. Punishing others in punishing work.

If people do not fear death

How can you threaten them with it?

If people live in constant fear of death,

Because those who break the law are seized and killed,

Who would dare to break the law?

There has always been an officia executioner.

If you take the law into your own hands

And try to take his place, It is like trying to take the place of a

master carpenter

In which case you would probably hurt your hands.

When
people are at one with Infinity,

they have no fear of death

and so they are indifferent to threats.

When
people are confused

with the distinction of life and death,

they fear death.

If
death is the penalty for breaking the law,

the vast majority will be law abiding.

There
are always official executioners

and they are at one with killing.

If
you try to take their place,

it is the same as trying to cut wood

in place of the master carpenter.

If
you try to take the master carpenter's place,

you will only succeed in cutting

your hands.

People do not fear Death.

If it cannot be avoided, why should Death be feared ?

It would seem that if people normally fear Death, and behave badly,

I should capture and execute them.

Who would dare ?

Normally, government executioners do the killing.

Now, to replace them is to substitute for skilled professionals.

In doing so, take care not to injure your own hand.

If the people are not afraid to die,

How can you threaten them with death?

If the people are kept in constant fear of death,

And if it were possible to arrest and put to death the law-breakers,

Who would dare do this?1

It is the master executioner2 who does the killing.

To assume the role of the master executioner and do the killing for oneself

Is like carving wood for oneself

Instead of leaving it to the master carpenter.

Those who carve wood for themselves

Instead of leaving it to the master carpenter

Rarely escape without cutting their own hands.

1. There is an ambiguity here between 'Who would dare break the law?' and 'Who would dare put to death the law-breakers?' In the light of 74c, the latter interpretation seems to make more sense.

2. i.e. Heaven.

Since people are not afraid of death,

Why should they be threatened with it?

If they were afraid of death,

Who would dare to be executioner

When the evil ones are captured and executed?

The best killer kills all the time.

One who kills in the most accurate and exacting way

Can seldom avoid injuring one's own hands.

"The people are always lacking in the fear of death." Then why frighten them with death?

Supposing the people always had the fear of death, and we could catch law breakers and kill them - who would dare?

There is always The Executioner - he does the killing. Doing the killing in The Executioner's place, this is like "doing the cutting in the master carpenter's place." One who cuts in the master carpenter's place - seldom it is he does not cut his hand.

It makes no sense to threaten with death him who is not afraid of death.

Yet he who threatens others with death and takes pleasure in this — will be destroyed.

The theme of life and death is under control of Tao alone. No one is allowed to control it instead of Tao! He who decides to do such a thing only harms himself.

The justice system could not rely of death penalty,

Because for those not afraid of death,

Will be entirely inefficient.

When
oppression brings death at every occasion,

Who could be afraid of death?

Thus the judges in such a country are not relevant.

If
the people do not fear death, how can anyone use [the threat of] death to intimidate
them? Supposing the people to be caused to be constantly in fear of death and
at the same time to regard it as an unusual event---should I [be prepared to]
seize and have them killed then who would dare [perform the execution]? There
is always an executioner to do the killing. To take the place of the executioner
to kill is said to be [like] taking the place of the great lumberman to chop
wood. Now one who takes the place of the great lumberman to chop wood seldom
avoids injuring his own hand.

If the people do not fear death,

Why threaten them with death?

If we let the people always fear death,

And we capture and kill those who use trickery,

Who would dare [to use trickery]?

Those responsible for executions perform executions.

But those who perform executions for them

Are doing no more than carving wood for the greater carpenter.

And those who carve wood for the great carpenter

Can rarely fail to injure their own hands.

Unnatural Authority

When people do not fear death,

How can they be threatened with death?

Suppose people fear death and still do not conform,

Who would dare seize them and put them to death?

There is always the Master Executioner who kills.

To substitute for the Master Executioner in killing

Is like substituting for the Master Carpenter who carves.

Whoever substitutes for the Master Carpenter in carving,

Rarely escapes injury to his hands.

You cannot move a mountain with your bare hands nor can you control the flow of a river. The future is quite like this. Things will always change. The river will always flow. Your work will come to an end. Accept things as they are and achieve anything.

The people do not fear at all to die;

What's gained therefore by threatening them with death?

If you could always make them fear decease,

As if it were a strange event and rare,

Who then would dare to take and slaughter them?

The executioner is always set

To slay, but those who substitute for him

Are like would-be master carpenters

Who try to chop as that skilled craftsman does

And nearly always mangle their own hands!

Since the people do not fear death,

What is it for to frighten them with death?

If the people fear death and I can catch and kill those who make trouble,

Who dares to make trouble?

There is always someone who is in charge of inflicting death.

Inflicting death in place of those who are in charge of it can be described as hewing wood in place of a skillful carpenter.

Of those who hew wood in place of skillful carpenters, few have not cut their own hands.

If the common folk did not fear death, trying to use death to intimidate them would have no effect.

If one caused the common folk always to fear death, there would still be those who behaved perversely, but these I could seize and put to death, so who would dare be perverse?

There is the constant executioner who puts people to death.

If one puts people to death instead of this executioner, this means that he is doing the hewing instead of the great carpenter.

It rarely happens that one who tries to do the hewing instead of the great carpenter does not injure his own hand.

1. If the people were constant [in their behavior] and yet did not fear death,

2. How could you use execution to intimidate them?

3. If you brought it about that the people were constant [in their behavior]
and moreover feared, and [we] took those who behaved in abnormal ways and killed
them—who would dare act in this way?!

4. If the people are constant and moreover necessarily fear death, then we constantly
have the one in charge of executions.

5. Now killing people in place of the one in charge of executions, this [is
like] cutting wood in place of the head carpenter.

6. And of those who cut wood in place of the head carpenter, very few do not
hurt their hands!

If people's
lives suck,

and they look forward to death,

what good does it do

to threaten to kill them?

If people are
afraid to die,

and the wicked are condemned to death,

then who would dare to commit evil?

But that doesn't
mean you or I

can just take life and death

into our own hands.

That'd be like walking up

to an industrial buzzsaw

and trying to use it

without any training.

We'd only end up hurting ourselves.

.

Death

People are not afraid to die.

So why threaten them with death?

If people were afraid of death,

and lawbreakers could be caught and put to death,

who would dare to do so?

There is the Lord of Death who executes.

Trying to do his job

is like trying to cut wood for the Master Carpenter.

Those who try to cut wood for the Master Carpenter

rarely escape injuring their own hands.

When people are not afraid of death why threaten them with death?

And when an evil deed is threatened with death who would judge and put to death?

Only one decides about life and death.

He who judges and kills in his place resembles a blind man who wields a hatchet in place of the carpenter and wounds himself.

On Punishment

Lao Tze says,

The people do not fear death;

what purpose is in trying to frighten them with death?

Supposing the people are afraid of death;

I could always seize those who do wrong, and put them to death.

Who would dare to do wrong?

There is a regular one who presides over the execution of death.

He who would execute death on behalf of the executioner is what is described as chopping wood on behalf of the great carpenter.

Seldom is it that he who undertakes the chopping on behalf of the great carpenter does not hurt his own hands.

USURPING THE TAO

If
the people are not afraid of death,

they have no fear of threats of death.

If
early death is common in the land,

and if death is meted out as punishment,

the people do not fear to break the law.

To
be the executioner in such a land as this,

is to be as an unskilled carpenter

who cuts his hand

when trying to cut wood.

If you realize that all things change,

there is nothing you will try to hold on to.

If you aren't afraid of dying,

there is nothing you can't achieve.

Trying to control the future

is like trying to take the master carpenter's place.

When you handle the master carpenter's tools,

chances are that you'll cut your
hand.

When people are no longer afraid of death, how can they be disciplined by death?

And if someone likes to be abnormal he may be arrested and punished, then who else would dare to be abnormal?

Since the one to kill is killed, a great professional killer is like a great professional chopper whose hands are subject to be hurt.

Whenever people are unafraid of death, how can killing be used as a threat?

Whenever people are afraid of death and are acting contrary, I will catch and kill them, who else can act so?

When people are absolutely afraid of death but perform killing, they are the best qualified to be executioners.

This is like doing carving for a master craftsman.

Doing the carving for a master craftsman, how could one's hand not get cut?

LXXIV

If
people were content with their own deaths

You could not use force on them; they would be immune

But this is not the way the world is

If
you threaten them with death to make them behave

You must assign someone to kill them, or do it yourself

Who, then, kills: you, or the executioner, or the state?

Someone must take the responsibility

Whoever
is responsible for death has put his way above the tao

Yet though he can end a life, the tao will by its nature find a way to return

Any sane man would find in that cause for worry

If People Usually Don't Fear Death

If people usually don't fear death,

how can death be used to scare them?

If people are made to fear death,

and you can catch and kill them

when they act oddly,

who would dare?

There are always executioners.

And to kill in place of an executioner

is taking the place of a master carver.

Those who take the place

of a master carver

rarely avoid cutting their hands.

If people are not afraid to die, how death can be used to threaten them?

If we make people afraid of death, and execute a few extreme offenders, who would dare to offend again?

It is normal to have executioners who kill.

Substituting an executioner in killing is like substituting a master lumberjack in chopping trees.

Chopping trees by non-professionals rarely results in no hand injuries.

When the people are not afraid of death, why scare them with the specter of death?

If you could make the people always afraid of death, and when someone persisted in breaking the law, then we might arrest and execute him, and who would dare to break the law?

Is not the great executor always there to kill?

If we want to do the killing for the great executor, this is like to chop wood for a master carpenter.

To chop wood for a master carpenter: we would be lucky indeed if we did not hurt our own hand.

If men are not afraid to die,

it is of no avail to threaten them with death.

Making men fears death,

kill those who breaks laws,

who will dare to break the law?

The official executioner, does the execution.

To do his job for him,

is the same as an apprentice to perform a job of the master carpenter,

he will often hurt his own hands.

When the people do not fear death,

of what use is it to threaten them with death?

If the people were always afraid of death

and if those who did wrong

would always be arrested and put to death,

who would do wrong?

There
is always a Lord of Execution

whose duty it is to kill.

If you try to fill that function

it is like trying to hew wood

in place of a master carpenter. You will probably injure your own hands.

People
not afraid of death

cannot be threatened with

death.

What, then, is the use of threats?

Even if people feared death

and were afraid of its strangeness,

who should be responsible

for carrying out the threat

and killing them?

Famine, rain, drought, hurricanes, snow, tornadoes

are more than sufficient.

For
people to do the work of nature

is like

assuming the job of a master carpenter

and doing the sawing

you would be lucky

not to lose a finger.

When the people are not afraid of death, why threaten them with death sentences?

Even supposing the people are constantly afraid of death and we can seize and
kill those who are unruly or vicious, who would dare to slay them? There's always
the master executioner (Heaven). To kill in his stead is like thrusting oneself
into he master-carpenter's place and doing his chipping for him. "He who tries
it is lucky if he doesn't cut his hand," they say. To undertake executions for
the master executioner is like hewing wood for him. It rarely happens you escape
injuring your own hands. Now, often it happens as well that the executioner
is killed -

And to take the place of the executioner is in part like handling the hatchet
for the master carpenter. He who handles the hatchet for the master carpenter
seldom escapes injury to his hands.

If the people never fear death,

what is the purpose of threatening to kill them?

If the people ever fear death,

and I were to capture and kill those who are devious,

who would dare to be so?

If the people must be ever fearful of death,

then there will always be an executioner.

Now,

To kill in place of the executioner

Is like

Hewing wood in place of the master carpenter;

Few indeed will escape cutting their own hands!

When the people do not fear death, of what use is it to overawe them with it as a penalty?

And if they were always held in fear of death, and I could lay my hand upon all evil doers and slay them, would I dare to do it?

There is always the Great Executioner!

For one to usurp that office is like a novice cutting out the work of a great architect.

Such a one rarely fails to cut his own hands!

The Tao Contains All Loss and Gain

Events are always changing

and nothing can be grasped.

Change always means losing something

and gaining something else.

There is no loss without a gain,

no gain without a loss.

Therefore do not cling to anything;

to a possession, a circumstance, or a person.

Do not even cling to life.

Death itself must lead to gain

for life and death are both within the Tao.

Committing your life to another person

is a great change,

filled with both loss and gain.

You lose some independence

You gain a world of love.

Gaining a world of love,

you fear its loss.

But you need not be afraid.

The Tao contains all loss and gain

and contains each of you as well.

The people are not afraid of death. Why, then, threaten them with death?

Suppose the people are always afraid of death and we can seize those who are vicious and kill them, Who would dare to do so?

There is always the master executioner (Heaven) who kills. To
undertake executions for the master executioner is like hewing wood for
the master carpenter. Whoever undertakes hewing wood for the master
carpenter rarely escapes injuring his own hands.

People starve

If taxes eat their grain,

And the faults of starving people

Are the fault of their rulers.

That is why people rebel.

Men who have to fight for their living

And are not afraid to die for it

Are higher men than those who, stationed high,

Are too fat to dare to die.

The people are not afraid of death; what is the purpose of using death to frighten them?

However, if the people are afraid of death, and very few people violate the law, catch and execute these criminals, and who will dare to do it again?

Killing people is the job of the heavens.

If you take over the job of the heavens, it is like carving wood for the carpenter.

If you carve wood for the carpenter, it is rare that you will not hurt your own hand.

If the people do not fear death,

For reasons of extreme poverty or suffering,

What is the point of threatening them with death?

If the people fear death,

And if the outlaws are captured and killed,

Who will dare to break the law?

Yet, the act of killing should always be

The exclusive province of the Great Executioner.

Therefore, to kill in place of the Great Executioner is

Like hewing wood in place of the master carpenter;

Few, if ever, will escape cutting their own hands.

Since people are not afraid of death,

Why should they be threatened with it?

If they were afraid of death,

Who would dare to be executioner

When the evil ones are captured and executed?

The best killer kills all the time.

One who kills in the most accurate and exacting way

Can seldom avoid injuring one's own hands.

When the people are no longer afraid of death, why threaten them with the executioner?

If the people feared death, and execution was imposed as a penalty; who would dare transgress The Law?

Heaven is the Master Executioner.

Whoever tries to take Heavens place is like an amateur trying to use the master carpenters' tools to hew wood,

if he tries to use the tools he will likely hew himself.

