===== Chapter 65 =====

Those of old who were good at governing [with] the Tao

Did not thereby enlighten the people.

[That] would thereby cheat them.

The difficulty of people to govern

Is because of their excessive cleverness.

Therefore, to use cleverness to govern the kingdom

Is [to be] a thief to the kingdom.

Not to use cleverness to govern the kingdom

Is [to be] a blessing to the kingdom.

Those who understand these both

Also examine the System.

Always understanding and examining the System

Is called Mystic Virtue.

Mystic Virtue is mysterious!

Profound!

It grants counter-intuitive things!

Then [you] are truly indeed

The utmost and greatest comfort [to your people].

Taoist rulers of old Did not enlighten people But left them dull.

People are difficult to govern Because they are very clever. Therefore,
Ruling through cleverness leads to rebellion. Not leading through
cleverness Brings good fortune.

Know these two things And understanding the enduring pattern. Understand the enduring pattern: This is called original Te.

Original Te goes deep and far. All things reverse Return And reach the great headwaters.

The ancients who excelled at following Tao

Did not enlighten people

But kept them free from cleverness.

If people are too clever they are difficult to rule.

To rule the state with cleverness

Is to rob the state;

But to rule the state without cleverness

Is to benefit the state.

These are the two forms of rulership.

To remain aware of them is to have the secret virtue.

The secret virtue reaches far and touches all.

It leads all things back to the great accord.

ESTABLISHING HARMONY

The ancient Sages, knowing the natural Tao,

Refrained from schooling others in intellectual enlightenment.

Calculative thinking and strict intellectual processes were discouraged,

For people were argumentative and difficult t< lead when so schooled.

Leading -

Through intellect alone - harmful to all,

Through encouraging the simple and natural intuitive part of mankind - a blessing to all.

Understanding the difference between these,

A test and a standard exists.

Being able to apply this test and standard,

Is a profoundly mysterious virtue.

This Te,

Being deep, penetrating and far reaching -

All Things return to their natural state,

Bringing the original complete harmony to all.

The ancients were excellent in the practice of the Tao.

It was surely not only because they were of the light, but because they were able to receive the people's folly.

People are difficult to govern because of their extreme cunning.

Therefore cunning governs the rulers of the country.

They are thieves.

When cunning does not govern the rulers of the country, there is good fortune.

Recognize both of these.

Always pay attention to the way the master speaks of the mysterious action of the soul.

The mysterious action of the soul is deep! Distant!

Join with its substance and return!

After this great harmony is at its height.

THE PURITY OF THE THE

They of old time that were skilled in the Tao sought not to enlighten the

people, but to keep them simple.

The
difficulty of government is the vain knowledge of the people. To use

cleverness in government is to scourge the kingdom; to use simplicity is

to anoint it.

Know
these things, and make them thy law and thine example. To possess

this Law is the Secret Perfection of rule. Profound and Extended is this

Perfection; he that possesseth it is indeed contrary to the rest, but he

attracteth them to full accordance.

The ancients who showed their skill in practising the Tao did so, notto enlighten the people, but rather to make them simple and ignorant. Thedifficulty in governing the people arises from their having much knowledge.He who (tries to) govern a state by his wisdom is a scourge to it; whilehe who does not (try to) do so is a blessing. He who knows these two thingsfinds in them also his model and rule. Ability to know this model and ruleconstitutes what we call the mysterious excellence (of a governor). Deepand far reaching is such mysterious excellence, showing indeed its possessoras opposite to others, but leading them to a great conformity to him.

The former sages, who travelled along the straight and simple path

Brought the people wisdom instead of knowledge

When people know much, unity is impossible to keep

That's why science disturbs the togetherness of men

And wisdom guards that togetherness

One who understands this

Understands that wisdom and knowledge are in conflict with each other

Once you understand this, you'll be wise

And you will turn back to simplicity

And feel one with everything and everybody

Originally people knew how to follow Nature, For they did not try to arouse in the people an interest in cunning, but let them remained unspoiled.

The shrewder people are, the harder they are to govern. Therefore to try to improve government by means of increasing cleverness in people is to endanger it. But to improve government by encouraging honesty in the people is beneficial.

The comprehend the significance of these two ways is to be profoundly intelligent.

Profound intelligence is that penetrating and pervading power To restore all things to their original harmony.

In the days of old those who practiced Tao with success did not,

By means of it,

Enlighten the people, but on the contrary sought to make them ignorant.

The more knowledge people have, the harder they are to rule.

Those who seek to rule by giving knowledge

Are like bandits preying on the land.

Those who rule without giving knowledge

Bring a stock of good fortune to the land.

To have understood the difference between these who things

Is to have a test and standard

To be always able to apply this test and standard

Is called the mysterious "power", so deep-penetrating,

So far-reaching,

That can follow things back —

All the way back to the Great Concordance.

The ancient observers of Tao did not teach it to others.

They let them remain simple and unknowing.

People are difficult to deal with when they think they know.

Leaders who think they know are a curse to those they lead.

Leaders with a simple heart are a blessing to all.

Both are manifestations of the same truth.

Knowing the truth is Virtue.

Virtue is mysterious, profound, far reaching.

Reaching far, it returns to itself and is complete.

Those ancients skilled at practicing the way

Did not try to enlighten the people

(But) would have tried to simplify them

The difficulties of governing the people

Are due to their great cleverness

And so to use cleverness in governing a realm

Is an injury to the realm

To avoid using cleverness in governing a realm

Is a favor to the realm

Those who comprehend both of these

Also examine for patterns

Always to know to look for patterns

May be called a mystic power

A mystic power so deep & so far reaching

(As) to help creation to turn itself around

Natural succession then reaches perfect harmony

History

Those who practiced Tao in antiquity,

Did not use it to enlighten the people,

Rather they used it, to make them dumb.

Now the reason why people are difficult,

Is because their knowledge.

As a result, to use knowlwedge to rule the state

Is thievery of the state.

To use ignorance to rule the state

Is kindness to the state.

One who constantly understands these two,

Also understands the principle.

To constantly understand the principle -

This is called Profound Virtue.

Profound Virtue is deep, is far-reaching,

And together with things it returns.

Thus we arrive at the Great Accord.

In ancient times those who practiced Tao didn't want to enlighten people, but to keep them natural and simple.

When cleverness and intellect abound, people don't do well. A leader who governs with cleverness cheats his people. A leader who governs with simplicity is a blessing to his people.

These are the two alternatives. Understanding them is subtle insight.

The use of subtle insight brings all things back into the oneness.

There were those of old who knew the Way,

And loved it in their daily lives.

They did not preach enlightenment,

Or practice deceit among the people.

They lived well because they lived simply.

Now with trickery and brilliance

Are the people governed,

And yet with the utmost difficulty!

A country ruled with cleverness

Is a country gone to waste.

Govern your country in simple innocence,

And it will be blessed among nations.

Remaining aware of the alternatives,

Our conduct may be correctly guided.

Holding fast to this guiding awareness

Is the action of natural virtue.

Natural virtue comes from clarity-

The resonant clarity of the Cosmic Source.

It draws us back within, to the Original Essence-

The great Harmonic, which may be touched

Every day in loving gratitude.

People are not by nature stupid and submissive, as some would make them out to be. This is why it is so difficult to govern them with "trickery and brilliance," because they can inwardly read deceit and corruption in a leader, even if they appear to go along with the program.

"A country ruled with cleverness" is one whose leaders have set themselves above and apart from the people. It is as if such leaders parade their own enlightenment in the ways of governing before the people (a very common practice in election campaign speeches), to prove their fitness to rule. Inevitably, such nonsense will be exposed, because it traps itself in its own complex net of lies.

Lao Tzu offers a more practical and resonant approach to leadership, which accords with his teaching on personal governance: "remaining aware of the alternatives." It is to be noted that he does not speak in terms of "remaining aware of the opposites," because he is trying to lead us past an apparent paradox. To live well (and to lead well) by living simply is not to reduce every course of action to diametrically opposed paths, but to nurture one's own inner ability to feel and balance an entire range of alternatives. For when every decision is reduced to one of two opposing options (the Republican way or the Democratic way; to attack or to resort to diplomacy; to tax and spend or to offer tax breaks), a broad spectrum of possibility is ignored. It is within that very spectrum that the correct solution usually lies, and not at the polar extremes of choice. When we are reduced to governing from within the realm of opposites, then trickery and manipulation are required to divert the people from following the way of common sense and inner clarity. Lao Tzu is asking the modern leader, "why waste or repress resources that will make your job infinitely easier?" For when the Sage is allowed to lead, then much of the work of governing tends to happen by itself, through the "natural virtue" of each individual. This process leads the nation to the harmony in which true leadership spontaneously occurs; this is the "simple innocence" of which the poet speaks.

Simplicity an Ancient Standard

The
ancient followers of Tao

did not use it to increase knowledge,

but rather to preserve simplicity.

People
are difficult to govern

when there is too much knowledge.

Whoever rules a country by furthering knowledge

is that nation's curse.

Whoever rules a country by furthering simplicity

is that nation's blessing.

To
know these two principles

is to know the ancient standard.

To know the ancient standard

is to possess Teh of a certainty.

Teh
is deep and vast as infinity.

It returns us to primal peace.

From the most ancient of times those who have practiced the Tao have depended on the simplicity of the people rather than on their adroitness.

When the people are difficult to control it is because they possess too much worldly wisdom.

Who governs by worldly wisdom is a robber in the land; who governs without out is a blessing to the state.

To know these two axioms is to become a model. To understand how to be a model is indeed the mystery of energy.

Verily, deep and far-reaching is this mystery of energy. It is the opposite of all that is visible, but it leads to universal concord.

In olden times the best practitioners of Tao did not use it to awaken people to knowledge,

But used it to restore them to simplicity.

People are difficult to govern because they have much knowledge.

Therefore to govern the country by increasing the people's knowledge is to be the destroyer of the country;

To govern the country by decreasing knowledge is to be the blesser of the country.

To be acquainted with these two ways is to know the standard;

To keep the standard always in mind is to have sublime virtue.

Sublime virtue is infinitely deep and wide.

It goes to reverse all things;

And so it attains perfect peace.

Unlearned Virtuosity

Those in ancient times who were good at deem-acting on a guide

Did not to use it to make the people discerning but to make them stupid.

People's being hard to govern comes from their knowing how to do too much.

Hence to use know-how to govern a state is the thief of the state.

Not to use know-how to govern a state is the blessing of the state.

Those who know to do these two things are also evaluated models.

To treat knowing to follow evaluated models as constant,

This is called obscure virtuosity.

Obscure virtuosity becomes deep! Becomes distant!

Becomes the reversal of natural kinds.

After it is so, then it achieves great flow.

In the remote past, the man who was good in Tao did not lead his people to calculative thinking,

But let them remain ignorant of it.

The difficulty in cultivating men is that they are full of intellectual discrimination.

Governing the nation through intellectual discrimination is harmful to it.

Not governing the nation through intellectual discrimination is a blessing to it.

Knowing the difference between these two sets a standard.

To be aware of this standard is profound attainment.

Profound attainment is deep and far-reaching.

It is the reversal of ordinary things, yet it leads to great harmony with Tao.

In ancient times, those who knew well how to serve the Tao did not use it to enlighten the people but to fool them.

People are difficult to govern only because they are intelligent and resourceful.

Therefore to rule with intelligence harms the country.

To govern the country without intelligence is a blessing for the nation.

He who knows the difference, knows the principle.

To know the principle is called mysterious virtue.

Mysterious virtue is deep and far.

It might at first seem to go against the natural order but it will then lead to harmony.

Therefore, it is said:

"Those who implemented the Tao

Did not use it to make the people shrewd;

Rather, they used it to make them simple."

The reason why the people are difficult to rule

Is that they are crafty.

Therefore, using craft to govern a state

Is a pest to the state;

Using noncraft to govern a state

Is a blessing to the state.

Constantly remember: these two constitute a guideline;

Constantly remembering this guideline

Is called a deep and remote virtue.

The deep and remote virtue

Is deep indeed, remote indeed;

And, though contrary to all things,

Will eventually reach Grand Harmony.

In ancient times, the best Tao practitioners did not use it to educate the people,

But rather to restore them to simplicity.

It is difficult to govern people since they are very knowledgeable.

Therefore, ruling a country by increasing knowledge

Means destroying the country,

While ruling a country by reducing knowledge

Means blessing the country.

The person who is aware of these two ways knows the standard,

The person who keeps the standard in his mind is virtuous.

The highest virtue is profound and broad,

It goes back to the beginning of everything,

And in this way attains absolute peace.

Of old those who excelled in the pursuit of the way did not use it to enlighten
the people but to hoodwink them.

The reason why the people are difficult to govern is that they are too clever.

Hence
to rule a state by cleverness

Will be to the detriment of the state;

Not to rule a state by cleverness

Will be a boon to the state.

These two are models.

Always to know the models

Is known as mysterious virtue.

Mysterious virtue is profound and far-reaching,

But when things turn back it turns back with them.

Only
then is complete conformity realized.

The Virtue of Simplicity

The ancients who were well versed in Reason did not thereby enlighten the people; they intended thereby to make them simple-hearted.

If people are difficult to govern, it is because they are too smart. To govern the country with smartness is the country's curse. To govern the country without smartness is the country's blessing. He who knows these two things is also a model [like the ancients]. Always to know the model is called profound virtue.

Spiritual virtue, verily, is profound. Verily, it is far-reaching. Verily, it is to everything reverse. But then it will procure great recognition.

A master doesn't teach, but shows his disciples that what they think they know, they don't. If a person thinks they know, they are trapped in that knowledge. Once the master shows them not-knowing, they can guide themselves. At this stage the master's task is completed. The master doesn't try to show his prowess, but lets his disciples discover theirs. Therefore his disciples never resent him and simple allow him to point out their true essence.

Men who knew Direction in olden days did not teach the populace to be clever, but teach them to be simple.

A populace that is clever is difficult to govern.

Thus,

governing with cleverness robs a state;

governing not with cleverness benefits a state.

One who knows [the difference between] these two sets the standard.

Knowing the standard at all times is Profoundest Virtue.

Profoundest Virtue is deep; it is far.

Profoundest Virtue returns matters to naturalness, to the Grand Gentleness.

Ancient masters of Way

never enlightened people.

They kept people simple-minded.

It's impossible to govern

once you've filled people with knowing.

Use knowing to govern

and you plunder the nation,

but use not-knowing to govern

and you enrich the nation.

Once you understand this, the pattern is clear,

and always understanding the pattern is called dark-enigma Integrity.

Dark-enigma Integrity is deep and distant, is the return of things

back into the vast harmony.

Ancient rulers who were good at practicing Tao,

Did not aim to enlighten the people, but to keep them ignorant.

The difficulty in governing the people is due to their excessive knowledge.

Therefore:

He who governs a state through knowledge is the robber of the state;

He who governs a state not through knowledge is the blessing of the state.

He who knows these two alternatives also values the model of Tao.

Always valuing the model of Tao constitutes a profound virtue.

The virtue is so profound and so far-reaching,

Until the model becomes contrary to the reality!

Only then the great harmony would prevail.

Those
ancients who valued acting in tao

Did not come to be luminous

People attaining it came to be foolish.

The
difficulty with governing people?

It happens that what is wise is abundant.

So if it happens that wisdom governs the nation

It is the enemy of the nation

If it does not happen that wisdom governs the nation

It is the good luck of the nation

Those
who know both these things

Also investigate the patterns of entireness

To know and investigate patterns

Is appropriately called insightful ideal.

Insightful
ideal goes with the penetrating, with the far-reaching

With
it things go with turning back

And will reach the great alignment.

In antiquity, those who conformed themselves to the Principle did not seek to make the people clever, but aimed at keeping them simple.

When people are difficult to govern, it is because they know too much. Those who claim to procure the good of a country by disseminating instruction, are wrong, and ruin the country.

This is the formula of mysterious action, of great profundity, of great bearing.

It is not to the taste of (the curious) but, thanks to it, everything turns out well, peacefully.

Those of ancient times who were adept at the Tao

Used it not to make people brighter

But to keep them simple

The difficulty in governing people

Is due their excessive cleverness

Therefore, using cleverness to govern the state

Is being a thief of the state

Not using cleverness to govern the state

Is being a blessing of the state

Know that these two are both standards

Always knowing these standards

Is called Mystic Virtue

Mystic Virtue is so profound, so far-reaching

It goes opposite to material things

Then it reaches great congruence

The sage kings of ancient China were masterful in applying the Tao. They did not use it to make people more clever and more knowledgeable. Instead, they used it to guide people toward simplicity.

These sages understood very well that cleverness and knowledge would bring with them greater desires, deceit, and devious tricks. This would lead to complexities and chaos, thus making things difficult not only for them, but also for the people.

They came to the conclusion long ago that using guile, manipulation, and contrivance to govern would do great harm to the country - really not so different than stealing from it like a thief. On the other hand, not using these tricks and guiding the people toward simplicity would lead to benefits for all, and would therefore be a great blessing to the country as a whole.

Both of these approaches - shrewd cunning versus straightforward plainness - are standards, and it is important to know both. The ancient masters made it a point to understand Machiavellian methods thoroughly, while embracing upright, honest simplicity in actual practice. This mindset of never losing sight of both is known as Mystic Virtue.

The power of Mystic Virtue is beyond measure. It is both profound in its implications and far-reaching in its effects. It runs counter to the tendency to pursue material things, and opposite the typical person's desire for short-term gains. We see it as achieving a state of great congruence, because Mystic Virtue follows nature and is therefore perfectly congruent with the Tao.

Notes

Your life is a sovereign state in its own right, and you are the ruler of this state. If, like many people, you run your life with a measure of clever duplicity and contrived craftiness, you will also make everything more complex and difficult to manage. A complicated life filled with tension and stress is one where the joy has been taken away - by yourself. You would then be the thief who robs your own life of happiness.

Lao Tzu advises you to cultivate Mystic Virtue instead. That is, be fully aware of all the deceptive tricks and meddlesome cunning that can manifest in your life, but at the same time hold on to P'u, the ultimate principle of simplicity and plainness. This will be a great blessing in your life, and as you continue living this way - in total congruence with the Tao - you will feel profound and far-reaching effects of Mystic Virtue in every aspect of living, resulting in a life filled with joy and peace of mind.

THE TEH OF SIMPLICITY

In the olden days those who obeyed the spirit of Tao did not enlighten the people but kept them simple hearted.

The reason people are difficult to govern is because of their smartness; likewise to govern a people with guile is a curse; and to govern them with simplicity is a blessing. He who remembers these two things is a model ruler. Always to follow this standard and rule is teh, the profound.

Profound teh is deep indeed and far reaching. The very opposite of common things, but by it one obtains obedient subjects.

Those in the past who were good at practicing Tao,

Did not want to enlighten (ming) the people,

But to keep them in ignorance (yü).

People are hard to rule,

Because they know (chih) too much.

Therefore, to rule a nation by knowledge,

Is to be the nation's thief.

Not to rule a nation by knowledge,

Is to be the nation's blessing.

To know these two is to know heaven's rule (chi shih).

Always knowing heaven's rule,

Is called the dark (hsüan) te.

The dark te clarifies (ch'ing) and is far away (yüan).

It reverts (fan) with things.

Then there arrives the great harmony.

Simplicity an Ancient Standard

The ancient followers of Tao did not use it to increase knowledge, but rather to preserve simplicity. People are difficult to govern when there is too much knowledge. Whoever rules a country by furthering knowledge is that nation's curse. Whoever rules a country by furthering simplicity is that nation's blessing. To know these two principles is to know the ancient standard. To know the ancient standard is to possess Teh of a certainty. Teh is deep and vast as infinity. It returns us to primal peace.

The ancient rulers who followed the Tao

did not try to enlighten the people,

but rather aimed at making them dull.

People are hard to govern because they are so clever.

Rulers who seek to enlighten the people

are like bandits who prey upon the land.

Rulers who forget about enlightening the people

are a real blessing to the nation.

Remember these two enduring principles:

they represent the power [Te] of the Tao.

Te goes deep and far.

All things turn back and reach original harmony.

Sixty-five

In the beginning those who knew the Tao did not try to enlighten others,

But kept it hidden.

Why is it so hard to rule?

Because people are so clever.

Rulers who try to use cleverness

Cheat the country.

Those who rule without cleverness

Are a blessing to the land.

These are the two alternatives.

Understanding these is Primal Virtue.

Primal Virtue is deep and far.

It leads all things back

Toward the great oneness.

Those ancient men of the profound Tao

Did not use the Tao to enlighten the people

But use the Tao to make them simple.

The people are unruly

Because they are too clever.

Thus to govern a state by cleverness

Is bound to ruin the state;

Not to govern the state by cleverness

Is a blessing to the state.

These are two models of government;

Keeping the knowledge of these two models

Is known as the mysterious virtue.

The mysterious virtue is profound and far-reaching,

Running counter to concrete things.

At their extremes there is the most complete conformity to nature.

Of old a man who practiced Tao best

Did not thereby seek to make the people bright,

But to make them ignorant.

The people are difficult to govern,

Because they are too clever.

Therefore, to govern a state through knowledge

Is the robbing of the state;

Not to govern a state through knowledge

Is a blessing to the state.

Those who know these two

Also know the standard.

Always to know the standard

Is called the mysterious Te.

Deep and far-reaching is the mysterious Te!

Turn away from things.

Only then will the great obedience be attained.

The ancient ruler who followed the way of Dao,

Attempted to make people simple and unsophisticated, not clever and scheming.

People are unruly because they are too clever and devious.

Using sophisticated measures to run a country, you can only cause harm.

Using unsophisticated measures, you will bring prosperity to the country.

These two models are consistent with the immutable principles of Dao.

Understanding the immutable principles, you are a person of inconspicuous virtue.

Inconspicuous virtue is profound and enduring.

Inconspicuous virtue is the opposite of conventional wisdom.

By going with the flow, you will achieve great harmony.

Virtue of Innocence

Ch'un Teh

The ancients who were adept in following Tao

Used it not to develop the people's intelligence,

But to keep the people simple-minded.

People are difficult to rule,

Because they have too much knowledge.

Therefore, to use knowledge to rule a country

Inflicts a curse on the country;

Not to use knowledge to rule a country

Confers a boon on the country.

He who is aware of these two rules

Also sets a standard pattern (as the ancients did).

Awareness of the standard pattern is called Mystic Virtue.

As Mystic Virtue goes deep and reaches far,

And leads creatures to revert to their origin,

Then Great Concord will prevail.

In olden times those who were most practiced in the Tao did not use their knowledge to instruct the people; they

used it rather to keep them simple.

It is when they are overstocked with learning that the people are hard to govern.

To govern by adding to the people's store of learning is to prey on the country;

To govern by decreasing the people's store of learning is to be a blessing to the country.

He who is familiar with these two methods will not want for a touchstone.

Always bearing this in mind, he will be able to draw on the Mysterious Power;

This power is infinitely deep and far-reaching, and, unlike all things else, goes back and back,

Until it atains to complete Unity.

The ancients well versed in Tao

Did not enlighten the people

But kept them simple minded.

Why are the people hard to govern?

Because they are too clever.

Clever government is a curse,

Non-clever government a blessing.

To know these two things

Is to follow the ancient pattern,

And to know the ancient pattern

Is original virtue.

Original virtue is far-reaching and deep.

It leads all things to return

Back to the original harmony.

In ancient times, those who were well-versed in the practice of the subtle Way of the universe did not lead people to disintegrate their minds through intellectual development for the sake of partial achievement.

Instead, they dissolved all contradictory concepts and images in order to maintain the natural state of simplicity.

Why are people so hard to manage?

Because they have become complicated.

He who leads others with a conditioned and complicated mind is the source of calamity.

He who leads others with simplicity is the source of blessing.

To know these two principles is to possess a rule and measure, the symbol of the ancient wise one.

To keep the rule and measure constantly in your mind,

is to spontaneously manifest integral virtue.

Deep and far-reaching is the subtle truth of integrity.

It leads all things to return from worldly divergence to one great and universal life.

LXV.

Pure
Virtue

In
centuries of old the men who used the light

Of
the Tao to its goodness were not blinded,

They
used to practise it not to make the people bright,

But,
better still, to make them simple-minded.

In
the governing of men the very hardest thing

To
encounter is their sapience redundant,

To
govern by this sapience a robber rule will bring,

And,
to rule without it, blessing most abundant.

Who
knows of these two things has the key of government,

There
is benefit profound in their rehearsal,

Far-reaching
in extent, from all else different,

It
will swiftly bring agreement universal.

Of Old, he who was active in Tao did not use it to make people enlightened, but to make them more kind.

If people are difficult to govern it is because they have too much knowledge.

Therefore if you govern a kingdom by knowledge, you will be an oppressor of the kingdom.

But if you govern a kingdom by wisdom, you will give happiness to the kingdom.

If you know and do these things you will be a pattern for men.

Knowledge of how to be always a pattern for men is called profound Teh.

Profound Teh is in the very source of life, it pervades the utmost limits of life, it returns and dwells in every being.

When fully manifested, it unites all beings in a great harmony.

In the old days,

those who were good at the practice of Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

did not try to teach the people,

but to keep them in the state of simple life.

Why are the people hard to govern?

Because they are too tricky!

They who govern their state

with trickiness is its wrongdoer;

They who govern their state without resorting to trickiness is its

protector.

To know these principles is to have a rule and a measure.

To keep the rule and the measure constantly in your mind

is what we call

Virtue (Power) that is hidden!

It leads all things to return,

till they come back to the Great Balance!

Of old those who were well versed in the practice of the Way, rather than use it to enlighten the people, they used it to stultify the people.

If people are hard to rule, it is because of too much knowledge.

Therefore he who rules a state by means of knowledge, is like a robber of the state. He who will not rule a state by means of knowledge, is a boon for the state.

He who knows these two things, scrutinizes also the Measure.

Always to know how to scrutinize the Measure is called Mystic Virtue. Mystic Virtue is profound, is far-reaching, and operates contrariwise to things, till in the end it attains the Grand Conformity.

The ancients who showed their skill in practising the Tao did

so, not to enlighten the people, but rather to make them simple and

ignorant.

The
difficulty in governing the people arises from their having

much knowledge. He who (tries to) govern a state by his wisdom is a

scourge to it; while he who does not (try to) do so is a blessing.

He
who knows these two things finds in them also his model and

rule. Ability to know this model and rule constitutes what we call

the mysterious excellence (of a governor). Deep and far-reaching is

such mysterious excellence, showing indeed its possessor as opposite

to others, but leading them to a great conformity to him.

The ancients who walked the Path
did not seek to enlighten people with
it;
they used it, rather, to relax them.
The
people are hard to 'rule' if they are too 'sophisticated.'
Therefore, ruling
a state through 'information' actually weakens the state;
ruling a state
through natural simplicity brings DEI-ty into the state.
One
who is always mindful of these two types grasps a great paradigm;
mindfulness
of this paradigm is "mystical virtue."
Deep
and far runs this Mystical Virtue!
It runs counter to worldly things..
until they reach the great Sea!

Those
of old who found the way

Could see their inner core

They saw that it was hidden

And didn't bring it to the fore

When
people think they know the truth

They want all others to concur

But they are happy and content

When they remain unsure

Don't
try to lead with cleverness

Prefer instead simplicity

It's obvious that truth must lie

In nothingness and clarity

IN the old days, those who were well versed in the

practice of the Tao did not try to enlighten the

people, but rather to keep them in the state of simplicity.

For, why are the people hard to govern? Because they

are too clever! Therefore, he who governs his state

with cleverness is its malefactor; but he who governs

his state without resorting to cleverness is its

benefactor. To know these principles is to possess a

rule and a measure. To keep the rule and the measure

constantly in your mind is what we call Mystical

Virtue. Deep and far-reaching is Mystical Virtue! It

leads all things to return, till they come back to Great

Harmony!

The ancient practitioners of the Tao did not try to educate or enlighten the people;

they led them instead to a return to a natural simplicity.

The more sophisticated the people, the harder it is to control and rule them.

It follows also that a clever ruler can be a scourge to his nation.

Therefore it is a blessing to the nation and the people if the rulers and the people alike are simple,

unsophisticated, and full of the virtue of the Tao.

To know these two things is to have a rule and a model to guide oneself, and to guide the nation.

And to understand the rule and the model is to be practicing the mystical virtue.

This deep and profound mystical virtue is so far reaching;

it causes all things to return to the source of harmony.

The ancient Masters

who understood the way of the Tao,

did not educate people, but made them forget.

Smart
people are difficult to guide,

because they think they are too clever.

To use cleverness to rule a country,

is to lead the country to ruin.

To avoid cleverness in ruling a country,

is to lead the country to prosperity.

Knowing
the two alternatives is a pattern.

Remaining aware of the pattern is a virtue.

This dark and mysterious virtue is profound.

It is opposite our natural inclination,

but leads to harmony with the heavens.

The teacher's leaders did not emphasize complex theories. The practiced and taught a way of life based on consciousness and wisdom.

People who see the world in terms of theories often have a very intricate view of what is happening. Clarity is difficult for them. They are very hard to work with.

If you teach a group by making complex explanations, you will confuse people. They will take notes and fill their minds with opinions.

But if you return again and again to an awareness of what is actually happening, you will both clarify and enlighten.

The ability to distinguish between theory and practice will save you much trouble.

Practice a way of life, and demonstrate conscious cooperation with the single principle. If you cooperate with Tao, you will experience the power of universal harmony.

In ancient times those who followed the Tao

Did not try to educate the people.

They chose to let them be.

The reason people become hard to govern

Is that they think they know it all.

So, if a leader tries to lead through cleverness,

He is nothing but a liability.

But if a leader leads, not through cleverness, but

through goodness, this is a blessing to all.

To be always conscious of the Great Pattern

Is a spiritua virtue.

Spiritua virtue is awesome and infinite

And it leads All things back to their Source.

Then there emerges the Great Harmony.

From
time immemorial the sage has not

tried to teach oneness

but has embedded peace and harmony

in the openness of a simple life.

Why
is it so hard to rule?

Because people are at one with their

leaders.

Leaders who use cleverness

are confronted with more cleverness.

Cleverness only manifests confusion.

Those
who flow in the peace and harmony of

oneness

lead without attempting cleverness

and are a blessing to everyone.

These
too are distinctions,

cleverness and non-action.

Realizing
these two are distinctions

focuses one on the oneness of Infinity

and away from confusion.

Staying
centered in the oneness that permeates

Infinity

manifests peace and harmony.

At first,

those who knew the Way opposed enlightening people, considering it foolish.

People are more difficult to govern the more they know.

Thus a National government relying upon knowledge deceives the Nation.

When the National government does not rely upon knowledge, the Nation is

blessed.

Those who know these two also apply this standard.

To always know to apply this standard is called Mystic Virtue.

Mystic Virtue is deep and profound, a return to the Harmony of Things.

The greatest Concord was in the Past.

In ancient times, those who excelled in the pursuit of Tao did not seek to enlighten people, but to keep them in their natural state of ignorance.

The reason for this is that when people have too much knowledge they are difficult to govern.

Therefore, those who rule by increasing knowledge, do so to the detriment of the state;

And those who rule by decreasing knowledge, do so to the benefit of the state.

Knowing these two things is to follow the ancient standard.

To follow the ancient standard is called mystical Virtue.

Mystical Virtue is deep and far reaching.

By its practise, all things return to their original natural state

Of complete harmony.

The ancient wise persons who were good at keeping the Way

Did not try to achieve it by teaching sophisticated knowledge,

But by ridding people of the folly such knowledge holds.

A foolishly sophisticated nation is difficult to govern.

Therefore, there are two models which a ruler may follow:

One who rules with sophistication is stealing a nation,

One who rules with no sophistication is saving a nation.

To make the wise choice always is to be subtle and profound.

The subtle and profound wisdom is rooted far back in time

And such wisdom will also function far ahead into the future.

Therefore, such wisdom can be used

To help bring about what is natural in the world.

Those Excellent at doing Tao in ancient times - it was not to enlighten the people, but to keep them stupid.

The difficulty in governing the people - because of their knowledge. Yes: By "Knowledge!" govern the state - a crime against the state. By "Ignorance!" govern the state - a boon to the state.

Always: To understand these two lines, is also to understand the Ideal Pattern. Always: To understand the Ideal Pattern, is to have mysterious Te.

Mysterious Te is deep, far-reaching, in opposition to things - only afterward comes the Great Harmony.

He who cognized Tao does not shows off in front of ignorant people. He also refuses to "rule the crowd", and therefore he can continue his development and helping deserving people.

Confidential higher knowledge about the methods of development of consciousness can be harmful to people who are not ready for receiving it.

That wise, who knows about this and acts accordingly to this knowledge, becomes an example for others.

Thus acts Great Te.

In order to understand this, one has to recognize that Great Te is the Opposite of evil people. In relation to such people, Great Te is located at unreachable distance.

This is what Great Te is. It possesses the Highest Power and contains in Itself all the multitude of living beings! It unites and separates people; It controls everything! It is the Ruler deserving the most strong love and respect!

By learning from It, you will achieve the highest wellbeing!

Sages from the ancient time taught people the simple life,

Without a simple life, knowledge is indeed useless.

When
leaders mislead people,

People will follow by misleading each other.

Thus the fraud becomes the master of everybody.

By knowing this, misery not yet arrived can be avoided.

Those
of antiquity who were good at the practice of the Dao did not enlighten people---rather,
they made them ignorant. The people are difficult to regulate when they are
too clever. So to use cleverness to regulate a country is to do injury to the
country. To not use cleverness to regulate a country is to be a benefactor to
the country. Knowing these two alternatives constitutes a model. Having a constant
awareness of this model is called the dark and mysterious virtue. The dark and
mysterious virtue is profound and remote. It is opposed to [the ordinary inclinations
of] creatures and so comes into a great confluence [with the total process of
the universe].

The Ancients who were good in practicing Tao

Did not teach the people with intelligence

But kept them in ignorance.

The people are hard to govern when they know too much.

Therefore, one who rules the nation with knowledge robs the nation.

One who does not rule the nation with knowledge brings good fortune to the nation.

To know these two things means to know the standard.

To constantly know the standard is called mystical virtue.

Mystical virtue goes deep and far.

It returns with all things to reach great harmony.

The Danger in Cleverness

Those skillful in the ancient Tao

Are not obvious to the people.

They appear to be simple-minded.

People are difficult to lead

Because they are too clever.

Hence, to lead the organization with cleverness

Will harm the organization.

To lead the organization without cleverness

Will benefit the organization.

Those who know these two things

Have investigated the patterns of the Absolute.

To know and investigate the patterns

Is called the Subtle Power.

The Subtle Power is profound and far-reaching.

Together wtih the Natural Law of polarity,

It leads to the Great Harmony.

A clever man is not a good father. The simple man holds the key to the Universe.

Those ancients who were skilled in the Way

Did not enlighten people by their rule

But had them ever held in ignorance:

The more the folk know what is going on

The harder it becomes to govern them.

For
public knowledge of the government

Is such a thief that it will spoil the realm;

But when good fortune brings good times to all

The land is ruled without publicity.

To know the difference between these two

Involves a standard to be sought and found.

To
know that standard always, everywhere,

Is mystic Virtue, justly known as such;

Which Virtue is so deep and reaching far,

It causes a return, things go back

To that prime concord which at first all shared.

From of old those who have carried out the principle of Tao do not enlighten the people with it, but make them foolish and simple with it.

What makes it difficult to govern the people is that they have too much knowledge,

Therefore to govern the state by wisdom is a disaster for the state,

And not to govern the state by wisdom is a blessing for the state.

It is a principle to now the two (by wisdom and not by wisdom).

Carrying out the principle forever is called the mysterious "De."

The mysterious "De" is very deep and far-reaching.

It is contrary to the nature of concrete things,

But leads to the greatest conformity.

Those in antiquity who were good at practicing the Dao did not use it to make the common folk intelligent but used it to make them stupid.

The reason the common folk are hard to govern is that they have too much knowledge.

Thus to use knowledge to govern the state is to bring about the theft of the state.

Not to use knowledge to govern the state is to enrich the state.

One should understand these two, for they constitute a consistent rule.

Constant understanding of this consistent rule is called "mysterious virtue."

Mysterious virtue is indeed profound, indeed far-reaching!

Such a one helps the people revert,

For only then will perfect compliance be attained.

1. Those who practiced the Way in antiquity,

2. Did not use it to enlighten the people.

3. Rather, they used it to make them dumb.

4. Now the reason why people are difficult to rule is because of their knowledge;

5. As a result, to use knowledge to rule the state

6. Is thievery of the state;

7. To use ignorance to rule the state

8. Is kindness to the state.

9. One who constantly understands these two,

10. Also [understands] the principle.

11. To constantly understand the principle—

12. This is called Profound Virtue.

13. Profound Virtue is deep, is far-reaching,

14. And together with things it returns.

15. Thus we arrive at the Great Accord.

In ancient times,

leaders who were right with Tao

didn't teach everybody

how to become enlightened.

They kept people's lives simple.

People who know
too much

can't be taught anything.

Leaders who try to be clever

always screw things up.

Leaders who keep things simple

always make things right.

If you get that,

you'll understand

the mysterious power of Tao.

That kind of
power is so deep,

so extensive,

it penetrates into every level of existence.

Know the Eternal Standard

The ancients who ruled skillfully

did not try to enlighten people but kept them in the dark.

People are hard to lead when they are too clever.

Those who lead with cleverness rob the country.

Those who lead without cleverness bless the country.

Understanding these two is to know the eternal standard.

Knowing the eternal standard is mystical power.

Mystical power is deep and far-reaching,

leading all things to return to perfect harmony.

The old Sages doers of the Tao did not bring to men the multiplicity of learning but taught the simplicity of wisdom.

Because those knowing much are not sure of the goal and hard to lead.

One who tries to advance men by increasing their learning only leads them to perdition.

One who increases their wisdom serves their liberation.

One who considers both is a pointer to the goal and a model.

To be a pointer to the goal means to be a carrier of virtue.

Teh the fullness of virtue wells up from the depth flowing far surmounts ignorance and resistance leading all life to the sea of fulfillment.

Mysterious Excellence

Lao Tze says,

In ancient times, those who learned the Tao in exercise of the government would work not to enlighten the people, but rather to make them ignorant.

The difficulty in governing the people arises from their having much craftiness.

He who tries to govern a state by his craftiness is a scourge to the state;

and he who does not try to do so is a boon to the state.

He who knows these two different results finds in them an absolute rule.

Ability to know this absolute rule constitutes what we call the mysterious excellence.

Profound and far-reaching is this mysterious excellence;

showing indeed its possessor to be contrary to others, but leading him to be completely obedient to the Tao.

VIRTUOUS GOVERNMENT

Knowing
it is against the Tao

to try to enforce learning,

the early sages did not contrive

to teach the way of the Tao.

There
are two ways of government.

One is to be cunning, to act with guile,

and to contrive to cheat the people.

When this way is used to rule,

the people grow in cunning,

and contrive to cheat the ruler.

The
second way to govern the land,

is to do so without contriving.

People so governed are truly blessed,

for they are governed with virtue,

and virtuous government is fair to all,

thus leading to unity.

The ancient Masters

didn't try to educate the people,

but kindly taught them to not-know.

When they think that they know the answers,

people are difficult to guide.

When they know that they don't know,

people can find their own way.

If you want to learn how to govern,

avoid being clever or rich.

The simplest pattern is the clearest.

Content with an ordinary life,

you can show all people the way

back to their own true nature.

The perfect ruler of ancient times did not teach the people to be intelligent, but rather taught them to be simple,

Because the difficulty of ruling people is always due to their being too intelligent.

Thus to use intelligence and skills to rule a country is robbing the country;

not to use intelligence and skills to rule a country is blessing the country.

By knowing these two - Dao and virtues, both of them are the models of Nature.

By constantly following the models is called the "Profound Virtues".

The Incomprehensive is unfathomable and far-reaching.

It (Change) brings all things to return (from the extreme) until perfect harmony - "Grand Concord" is reached.

Those who practiced Tao in olden times did not enlighten people,

Rather they made them simple.

What makes it the hardest to govern the people is what they already know.

It becomes most difficult to govern people because of their knowledge.

So, using knowledge to govern the country, knowledge itself becomes the thief of the country.

Not using knowledge to govern the country, knowledge itself is the Action of the country.

Always realize that these two are the model for ruling.

Always be aware that this model is the mystic Action.

Mystic Action is deep and far-reaching.

It is the opposite of matter.

Only thus does it approach the Great Harmony.

LXV

The
ancient leaders who followed the way

Were not trying to enlighten the people

But instead to give them no cause to have knowledge

If you use knowledge to rule you will be accused of thievery

Of protecting one against the interests of another

And everyone will want to know the laws to protect themselves

Avoid this, and your actions will be closer to the way

If
you keep this always in mind and practice it

You will lead a virtuous state

The effects of this are subtle and far reaching

And will always bring the people back

Good Practitioners of the Way in Ancient Times

In ancient times,

good practitioners of the Way

did not use it to enlighten the people,

but to make them unsophisticated.

When people are unruly,

it is because of their sophistication.

So to govern a country by cunning

is to rob the country.

Not using cunning to govern a country

is good fortune for the country.

To know these two

is also a model.

Being always aware of the model

is called hidden virtue.

Hidden virtue is deep, far-reaching,

in contrast to ordinary people.

Only when it is thus

does it reach great accord.

In the past, those who are good at Tao did not encourage people to be shrewd.

They encourage people to be honest.

People are difficult to govern if they are sly.

Advocating slyness in governing is the misfortune of a kingdom.

Opposing slyness in governing is the blessing of a kingdom.

Note that the above two points are also guidelines.

Constantly noticing the guidelines is Profound Te.

Profound Te is deep, broad, and against instinct.

But it can leads to great success.

In the old days, those who were well versed in the practice of the Way did not try to make the people know, but rather to keep them in the state of simplicity.

Why are the people hard to govern?

Because they are clever.

Therefore, he who governs his state with cleverness is its malefactor.

He who governs his state without resorting to cleverness is its benefactor.

To know these two principles is to possess a rule and a measure of governing.

To know the rule and the measure is mysterious Virtue.

Deep and far-reaching is mysterious Virtue!

It leads all things to return to great harmony.

In the ancient, those who knew the art of governing,

not to educate people, keep them ignorant.

It is hard to rule,

if people are clever.

Thus, rules with education, bad to the country.

Rules by keeping people ignorant, a blessing to the country.

Knowing these two, the same as knowing Tao.

Knowing Tao is a great virtue.

When the great virtue grows deep and reaches far,

it seems to be opposite of everything,

but it truly harmonizes with everything.

The ancients who practiced the Tao

did not use it to enlighten the people,

but rather to assist them in gaining simplicity.

The reason people are difficult to govern

is because they are too clever.

Hence,
a person who attempts

to govern a country by cleverness

will injure it.

Those who govern without cleverness

will be a blessing to the land.

These are the two models.

Knowing these models is called the Mystic Virtue.

The Mystic Virtue is deep and so far-reaching

that it can lead all things back

toward great harmony.

In
the past, when the path has been walked well

the walkers not only

did not show others the way

but even made others more ignorant about it

because

the smarter people become

the harder they are to control.

People who want to lead by promoting higher intelligence

and higher educational standards and harder tests

are thieves stealing from farmers and factories.

People who lead without pushing education

bless the people and the land.

Education causes discontent for what one has,

creates desire for more and better and higher

ignorance makes people feel good where they are.

To
understand the difference here is to know quality

to be able to apply this quality in life is to be on the path

This path ...

so long so old so deep so mysterious

going all the way back

to when all was one.

In old times those who practised a dao well, did hardly aim to enlighten people,
but to make them ignorant and hold them that way. It seems that the more knowledge
people have, the harder they are to rule. Maybe it's hard for people to live
in peace due to very much knowledge.

So he who rules the state through knowledge is robber of the state; and who
seek to rule by giving knowledge could be like [coming] bandits preying on the
land. Maybe all who seek to rule by knowledge form the nation's curse, eventually.

He who rules a state not through knowledge is a blessing. Those who seek not
to rule by knowledge, are the nation's blessing. To rule without giving knowledge
could bring a stock of good fortune to the land. [And maybe not.]

One who knows these two things also (sets) the standard.

Always to know such an old standard is called to of the deep, secret calibre.

When such secret virtue becomes clear, outgoing, far-reaching, and lets things
revert back to some guessed at source, all related things could return to some
natural state. It could go all the way back to [brutal] concord and harmony.

The ancients who practiced the Way did not enlighten the people with it;

They used it, rather, to stupefy them.

The people are hard to rule because they have too much knowledge.

Therefore,

Ruling a state through knowledge is to rob the state;

Ruling a state through ignorance brings integrity to the state.

One who is always mindful of these two types grasps a paradigm;

Mindfulness of this paradigm is called "mysterious integrity."

Deep and distant is this mysterious integrity!

It runs counter to things until it reaches the great confluence.

The ancients who practiced the Tao did not make use of it to render the people brilliant, but to make them simple and natural.

The difficulty in governing the people is through overmuch policy.

He who tries to govern the kingdom by policy is only a scourge to it; while he who governs without it is a blessing.

To know these two things is the perfect knowledge of government, and to keep them continually in view is called the virtue of simplicity.

Deep and wide is this simple virtue; and though opposed to other methods it can bring about a perfect order.

No Others Love Exactly as Do the Two of You

Be wary of relationship gurus.

They impose their own thoughts

and their own experience upon their words

and teach you what they know.

But this may not be

what you need to know yourself.

No others love exactly

as do the two of you.

We are all too quick to turn to ''experts"

instead of turning to ourselves.

We end up trying to construct our relationships

in line with the models they prescribe.

Listen and read with an open mind,

but let your own experience of each other

be your final guide.

In ancient times those who practiced Tao well Did not seek to enlighten people, but to make them ignorant.

People are difficult to govern because they have too much knowledge.
Therefore he who rules the state through knowledge is a robber of the
state; He who rules a state not through knowledge is a blessing to the
state.

One who knows these two things also (knows) the standard. Always to know the standard is called profound and secret virtue.

Virtue becomes deep and far-reaching, And with it all things return to
their original state. Then complete harmony will be reached.

Sound old rulers,
it is said,

Left people to themselves, instead

Of wanting to teach everything

And start the people arguing.

With mere instruction in command,

So that people understand

Less than they know, woe is the land;

But happy the land that is ordered so

That they understand more than they know.

For everyone's good this double key

Locks and unlocks equally.

If modern man would use it, he

Could find old wisdom in his heart

And clear his vision enough to see

From start to finish and finish to start

The circle rounding perfectly.

The ancient people who knew the DAO did not make people smart, but made them simple.

People are not easy to govern when they are too smart.

So, those who govern a country based on smartness are a disaster to the country.

Those who do not govern the country based on smartness are a fortune to the country.

These two ways are the long-lasting policies for governing a country.

Keeping these two policies is called real DE.

Real DE is so deep and far-reaching; it is opposite to what we know today.

However, it will eventually lead to the ultimate harmonic and natural state.

The ancients who mastered the Tao did not make the people sharp and clever.

Instead, they made the people simple and deep.

The people are hard to govern

When they are too clever and know too much.

To govern the people with cleverness is to bring about calamities.

To govern the people with simplicity is to bring about blessings.

To know these two alternatives is to have the standard of governance.

To understand the standard of governance is to have sublime virtue.

Sublime virtue is deep and far-reaching.

Though it runs counter to the common way,

It follows the great way of the Tao Eternal.

The ancient wise persons who were good at keeping the Way

Did not try to achieve it by teaching sophisticated knowledge,

But by ridding people of the folly such knowledge holds.

A foolishly sophisticated nation is difficult to govern.

Therefore, there are two models which a ruler may follow:

One who rules with sophistication is stealing a nation,

One who rules with no sophistication is saving a nation.

To make the wise choice always is to be subtle and profound.

The subtle and profound wisdom is rooted far back in time

And such wisdom will also function far ahead into the future.

Therefore, such wisdom can be used

To help bring about what is natural in the world.

The ancient practitioners of the Tao did not try to educate or enlighten the people;

they led them instead to a return to a natural simplicity.

The more sophisticated the people, the harder it is to control and rule them.

It follows also that a clever ruler can be a scourge to his nation.

Therefore it is a blessing to the nation and the people if the rulers and the people alike are simple,

unsophisticated, and full of the virtue of the Tao.

To know these two things is to have a rule and a model to guide oneself, and to guide the nation.

And to understand the rule and the model is to be practicing the mystical virtue.

This deep and profound mystical virtue is so far reaching;

it causes all things to return to the source of harmony.

