===== Chapter 52 =====

The world had a beginning.

It's regarded as being a mother to the world.

Having attained its mother

Thereby know its offspring.

Having known its offspring

Return, hold to its mother.

Not having a body, there is no danger.

Stop the exchange

Close the openings

Throughout, the body does not strive.

Open the exchange

Abet the affairs

Throughout, the body is not helped.

Seeing the lowly is called illumination.

Maintaining flexibility is called strength.

Use the light.

Return, go back to the illumination.

Not losing the body is a disaster.

Indeed, be practicing always.

The world has a source: the world's mother. Once you have the mother, You know the children.

Once you know the children, Return to the mother. Your body dies. There is no danger.

Block the passage, Bolt the gate: No strain Until your life ends.

Open the passage, Take charge of things No relief Until your life ends.

Seeing the small is called brightness Maintaining gentleness is called strength.

Use this brightness to return to brightness. Don't cling to your body's woes. Then you can learn endurance.

The universe had a beginning.

This beginning is the mother of all.

When you know the mother,

You know her children, too.

When you know the children,

Go back to be with the mother

And throughout your life you will suffer no harm.

Close the passageways,

Lock the entryways

And throughout your life you will not get worn out.

Open the passageways,

Multiply your concerns

And throughout your life you will not be saved.

If you see the insignificant you have discernment.

If you can remain flexible you are strong.

Use the rays and return to the source of light.

Do not be the cause of your own distress.

This is the way of practicing the constant.

MOTHER AND CHILDREN

Being the essence, the universal beginning,

It is known as the Mother of All Things.

Knowing the Mother, the essence, the Tao -

All Things, being children of the Mother, are likewise known.

In truly knowing the children,

Better is the understanding of the Mother.

Harm and danger are forever elusive.

In silence and moderation of sensory disturbance,

Life's strengths are maintained.

In babble and meddlesome activity,

Life's burdens prevail.

Seeing the subtle and small is true vision.

Yielding, is the display of true strength.

Using wisely our worldly resources - the "Outer Lights",

The "Inner Lights" of true self are awakened and known.

Thus, eluding harm and danger,

Absolute and natural virtue prevail.

Heaven below (the sacred body) has a beginning that was made by Heaven below's mother.

When the mother finished, she recognized her child.

When she recognized her child, she held it again.

Till the end the body is not in danger.

Close your openings, shut your gates, to the end of your days your body will not be exhausted.

Open your mouth, meddle in your affairs, to the end of your days, your body will not be taken care of.

Recognize that what is subtle is called the light.

Put its brilliance to use.

Return to the original state of the light.

The body is not in danger.

This is called the eternal practice.

THE WITHDRAWAL INTO THE SILENCE

The Tao buddeth forth all things under Heaven; it is the Mother of all.

Knowing
the Mother, we may know her offspring. He that knoweth his

Mother, and abideth in Her nature, remaineth in surety all his days.

With
the mouth closed, and the Gates of Breath controlled, he remaineth

at ease all his days. With the mouth open, and the Breath directed to

outward affairs, he hath no surety all his days.

To
perceive that Minute Point is True Vision; to maintain the

Soft and Gentle is True Strength.

Employing
harmoniously the Light Within so that it

returneth to its Origin, one guardeth even one's body from evil, and

keepeth Silence before all men.

">

(The Tao) which originated all under the sky is to be considered asthe mother of them all. When the mother is founded, we know what her childrenshould be. When one knows that he is his mother's child, and proceeds toguard (the qualities of) the mother that belong to him, to the end of hislife he will be free from all peril. Let him keep his mouth closed, andshut up the portals (of his nostrils), and all his life he will be exemptfrom laborious exertion. Let him keep his mouth open, and (spend his breath)in the promotion of his affairs, and all his life there will be no safetyfor him. The perception of what is small is (the secret of) clear-sightedness;the guarding of what is soft and tender is (the secret of) strength.

Who uses well his light. Reverting to its (source so) bright, Will fromhis body ward all blight, And hides the unchanging from men's sight.

The world sprouts from something

People could call it the mother of the world

When one knows that mother, one knows her child

One who becomes like that child again, will know the mother

And for the rest of his life nothing can harm him ever again

He won't criticize anyone and lets no one influence him

And his life will be without worries

But one who condemns others and whose interests concern only himself

Will be full of worries the rest of his life

One that sees a gleam of light in darkness sees the light at the end of the tunnel

Holding on to that gleam of light requires strength

One who follows that light, turns back to the original light

Then all danger is gone

And you'll live the eternal life

Nature, because it has mothered all, may be regarded as Mother Nature.

He who understands Mother Nature, understands her children. But to avoid the children's mistakes, one should follow close to Mother Nature herself, If throughout his life he desires a safe guide.

If one remains silent and keeps to himself, he will not fail to fulfill his life;

But is he gives advice and meddles in others' affairs, he invites trouble.

If you see what is small as it sees itself, And accept what is weak for what strength it has, and use what is dim for the light it gives, Then all will go well.

This is called acting naturally.

That which was the beginning of all things under heaven

We may speak of as the "mother" of all things.

He who apprehends the mother

Thereby knows the sons.

And he who has known the sons,

Will hold all the tighter to the mother,

And to the end of his days suffer no harm;

"Block the passages, shut the doors,

And till the end your strength shall not fail.

Open up the passages, increase your doings,

And till your last day no help shall come to you."

As good sight means seeing what is very small

So strength means holding on to what is weak.

He who having used the outer-light can return to the innerlight

Is thereby preserved from all harm.

This is called resorting to the always-so.

Where the realm of heaven and earth begins

could be called the mother of creation.

Knowing the mother, become the child.

Being the child, stay close to the mother.

Death will not bother you.

Stay quiet, keep inside,

and you will never want for anything.

Open your mouth, meddle in affairs,

and you are beyond rescue.

Perceiving the subtle is insight.

To yield requires strength.

Use the light of creation to become illuminated

and thus be saved.

This is called "entering the Absolute."

The world had a beginning

Regarded as mother to the world

Having found this mother

Through this comprehend her children

Having comprehended her children

Return & attend to the mother

The death of self is nothing to fear

Close the passages

Secure the gates

(And) the rest of life is no trouble

Open the passages

Conclude the affairs

(And) the rest of life finds no salvation

To perceive in detail tells of clarity

To maintain flexibility tells of strength

Make use of what is illuminated

To return home again to the light

Do not abandon yourself to misfortune

This may be called "sustainable practice"

Restraint

The World had a beginning,

Which can be considerd as the mother of the World.

Having attained the mother,

In order to understand her children,

If you return and hold on to the mother,

Until the end of your life you will suffer no harm

Block up the holes;

Close the doors;,

And till the end of your life you will not labor.

Open the holes;

Meddle in affairs;

And till the end of your life

you will not be saved.

To perceive the small is called "discernment".;

To hold on to the pliant is called "strength".

If you use the rays, to return to the bright light,

You will not abandon your life to peril.

This is called Following the Constant.

The origin and mother of everything in the world is Tao.

Know the mother and you can know the children. Having known the children, return to their source and hold on to her. Abiding by the mother, you are free from danger, even when your body dies.

Don't live for your senses. Close your mouth, close all the body's openings, and reside in the original unity. In this way you can pass your life in peace and contentment.

Open your mouth, increase your activities, start making distinctions between things, and you'll toil forever without hope.

See the subtle and be illuminated. Abide in gentleness and be strong.

Use your light, and return to insight. Don't expose yourself to trouble. This is following Tao.

The world as we know it has an origin,

Which may be called Mother Formless.

Hold the Mother to your deepest heart,

And you will understand the Cosmic Family.

Hold her children to your intuition,

And the Mother will embrace you, too.

Thus will your life flow freely

Through all of your days.

Guard the openings of speech and outer sensation,

And your life will be serene.

But if your life is spent

In expansive oration

And the compulsion to intervene,

Your heart will be in torment

Unto your very last breath.

Microscopic discernment within

Is the path of clarity.

The tenderest embrace is the strongest.

Let your own true radiance guide you,

For inner clarity is return to the Origin,

Where one's true self finds protection.

This is called, entering the eternal.

It is very hard to hear the voice of the Formless presence within when you spend your life in constant talk and impulsive intervention into others' affairs. The poet's message in this verse is especially appropriate to family relationships, where the machinations of power and control operate both openly and insidiously, often through cultural rules of loyalty, fidelity, and hierarchy. Thus, Lao Tzu offers a teaching on opening the heart to the family of the universe, a reference to the feeling presences of the invisible world. He again chooses a feminine symbol, "Mother Formless." This evokes the message of Hexagram 37 of the I Ching, called "The Family," which also draws upon feminine metaphor in its Judgment text, "the perseverance of the woman furthers." When we connect with the feeling presence of the Cosmic Mother, we open ourselves in turn to the community of beings within Nature that are her children: this is the "microscopic discernment within" that fulfills and reveals the natural life of the human family. When this discernment, this clarity, is present, the feudal structures of fealty and hierarchy can be discarded, and we discover that truly, "the tenderest embrace is the strongest." In Nature, the home is not a castle; the family is not a hierarchical ordering of roles according to such things as age or gender; there is no "breadwinner" or "provider"; no false duties of honor and obedience; and no titles or rules of ownership among the family members. These, indeed, are actually the bitter constraints that create division and breakdown within the family, and which lead the heart into torment, as the poet says.

The beginning of the universe

may be considered the mother.

Knowing the mother the sons can be known.

Knowing the sons we can keep close to the mother.

Thus life has within itself security.

Eyes
closed and mouth shut, life is without trouble.

Eyes open, busily conversant, life is without hope.

Whoever
sees the most minute sees clearest.

Whoever cherishes the weak has the most strength.

Whoever uses enlightenment has bright vision.

Thus,
no harm is done.

This is following Tao.

Everything has its origin in the mother of all under heaven

To know the mother the child must be perceived; the child being born the qualities of the mother must be maintained, to the end of life there will be no peril.

Close the doors of the senses, and the whole of life will be without care; open them, attend to the affairs of life and to the end deliverance will be impossible.

Perceive the germ, that is enlightenment.

Maintain weakness, that is stability.

Employ the light; revert to this enlightenment; no calamity will then be bequeathed to the body.

This is indeed to practice the unalterable.

The beginning of the Universe, when manifested, may be regarded as its Mother.

When a man has found the Mother, he will know the children accordingly;

Though he has known the children, he still keeps to the Mother:

Thus, however his body may decay, he will never perish.

If he shuts his mouth and closes his doors,

He can never be exhausted.

If he opens his mouth and increases his affairs,

He can never be saved.

To see the minuteness of things is called clarity of sight.

To keep to what is weak is called power.

Use your light, but dim your brightness;

Thus you will cause no harm to yourself.

This is called following the eternal (Tao).

So What?

The social world has a beginning

We deem it 'mother' of the social world.

Since we acquired its 'mother'

We use that to know its 'son'

Since we know its 'son'

We revert to embracing its mother.

Burying the self we risk nothing.

Shut up its exchanges ,

close its gates

and end life without struggle.

Open its exchanges,

benefit its social affairs

and still end life without saving anything.

see small, say 'discernible'

protect weakness, say 'coerce'

Use its light;

Revert and return to its discernment.

Bequeath yourself no trouble;

Deem this to be rehearsing the constant.

The world has its beginning,

Which may be called the origin of the world.

When one is aware of the origin,

One knows its manifestations.

When one is aware of its manifestations,

Yet abides with its origin,

One never falls short in all of one's life.

Ceasing verbal expressions,

Stopping the entry of sensations,

One is never exhausted.

On the contrary, when one is full of words

And entangled with one's affairs,

One is never able to save one's self.

To see what is invisible is to be awakened.

To remain gentle is to be strong.

Apply illumination and return to awakening.

Then one is free from disaster.

This is called living in accordance with reality.

The world had a beginning.

This beginning is the mother of the world.

Once you know the mother

you know the children.

When you know the children

you will return to embrace the mother.

Then you will live lifelong without danger.

Close the mouth, and the spirit will not escape.

Seal the ears, and the mind will not escape.

You will live lifelong without struggle.

Open the mouth, and take action for every matter, and you will live lifelong beyond hope.

To see the small is called clarity.

To know how to yield is called strength.

Use virtue outside the mind but return to virtue in the mind,

and you will live lifelong without danger.

This is what is called practising constancy.

All under heaven have a beginning,

Which is considered the mother of all under heaven.

Having found their mother,

You thereby know her children.

Having known her children,

You revert and adhere to their mother,

A lifetime without peril.

Stop your hole,

Close your door,

A lifetime without end.

Open your hole,

Increase your disturbances,

A lifetime without remedy.

Seeing tiny things is clear-sightedness.

Adhering to softness is strength.

Use its light,

Withdraw your own clear-sightedness,

And you shall bring yourself no calamity.

This is called following the constant.

People leave life and enter death.

Life's portion is three out of ten.

Death's portion is also three out of ten.

People who move from the day of birth into the realm of death,

Their portion is also three out of ten.

Why is that?

Because of their futile efforts to seek eternal life.

However, only those who do nothing to prolong their life,

Are better off than those who do everything in order to live longer.

I have heard that the person who knows how to preserve his life

When traveling the earth,

Will not encounter a rhinoceros or a tiger,

And when he goes into battle,

He will not be wounded by a weapon or an arrow.

The rhinoceros will not target him with its horn,

The tiger will not tear him apart with its claws,

Weapons will not find their mark on his body

Where they can pierce him with their blades and arrowheads.

Why is that?

Because he is out of the realm of death.

The world had a beginning

And this beginning could be the mother of the world.

When you know the mother

Go on to know the child.

After you have known the child

Go back to holding fast to the mother,

And to the end of your days you will not meet with danger.

Block
the openings,

Shut the doors,

And all your life you will not run dry.

Unblock the openings,

Add to your troubles,

And to the end of your days you will be beyond salvation.

To
see the small is called discernment;

To hold fast to the submissive is called strength.

Use the light

But give up the discernment.

Bring not misfortune upon yourself.

This
is known as following the constant.

Returning to the Origin

When the world takes its beginning, Reason becomes the world's mother.

As one knows his mother, so she in turn knows her child; as she quickens her child, so he in turn keeps to his mother, and to the end of life he is not in danger. Who closes his mouth, and shuts his sense-gates, in the end of life he will encounter no trouble; but who opens his mouth and meddles with affairs, in the end of life he cannot be saved.

Who beholds his smallness is called enlightened. Who preserves his tenderness is called strong. Who uses Reason's light and returns home to its enlightenment does not surrender his person to perdition. This is called practising the eternal.

Everything begins with the Tao and ends with the Tao. To know it retrace the steps of your life. When you reach back to the beginning, the Tao lies herein. Then you will realise there is no death. Without desire your heart is at peace. Without judgment your mind is clear. See who it is that sees. Witness thoughts come and go. Turn the light around and find its source. Practicing this leads to enlightenment.

The world has a beginning; it is the mother to the world.

By knowing the mother, one knows her children.

By knowing the children, one returns to their mother.

One is without danger in life.

Stuffing channels to block portals [to avarice], one is without concern in life.

Opening channels to facilitate contact [with avarice], one is without hope in life.

Seeing the tiniest is discernment.

Holding onto tenderness is strength.

Use one's light, reflect upon one's discernment, leave nothing to one's regret.

This is Eternal Direction.

There's a source all beneath heaven shares: call it the mother of all beneath heaven.

Once you fathom the mother you understand the child, and once you understand the child you abide in the mother,

self gone, free of danger.

If you block the senses and close the mind, you never struggle.

If you open the senses and expand your endeavors, nothing can save you.

Seeing the small is called enlightenment, and abiding in the gentle strength.

Wielding radiance return to enlightenment, then you're beyond all harm.

This is the cultivation of constancy.

The world had its beginning,

Which is known as the mother of the world.

Once the mother is known, her sons may be understood.

Once the sons are understood, still keep to the mother.

Then you will avoid mistakes all your life.

Close your apertures, shut your doors,

You will live a life without toil;

Open your apertures, meddle in distractions,

You will live a life beyond salvation.

Capable of seeing details is called clear vision;

Capable of yielding is called strength.

Using the innate light, recover your clear vision.

Then you will not be exposed to hidden danger.

This is called following the nature.

The
world is present of an origin

It happens that this acts as the mother of the world.

Grasp
and hold what is the mother

Knowledge of what is the child happens

Grasp knowledge of what is the child

Return, keep to what is the mother

Till the end the body lacks danger.

Cork
its bottle

Obstruct its door

Eventually the body lacks straining.

Open
its bottle

Complete its effort

Eventually the body lacks hope.

Seeing
the small say luminous

Keeping to yielding say strong

Using what is bright

Return, merge with what is luminous.

An
absence of offering bodily misfortune as a gift

Is appropriately called learning entirely.

That which was, before the beginning of the world, became the mother of the world.

He who has reached knowledge of the mother (matter, the body), knows through that her son (the vital spirit which is enclosed in it). He who knows the son (his vital spirit) And conserves the mother (his body), will reach the end of his days without accident.

If he keeps his mouth and nostril closed (to prevent evaporation of the vital spirit), he will reach the end of his days without having suffered decadence.

Whereas, if he talks a lot and causes himself much worry, he will use up and shorten his life.

Restricting one's considerations to small things, And one's cares to affairs of little importance, makes the mind clear and the body strong.

Concentrating one's intellectual rays in one's intelligence, And not letting mental applications harm one's body, is to protect (the mind) And make for long (life).

The world has a beginning

We regard it as the mother of the world

Having its mother

We can know her children

Knowing her children

Still holding on to the mother

Live without danger all through life

Close the mouth

Shut the doors

Live without toil all through life

Open the mouth

Meddle in the affairs

Live without salvation all through life

Seeing details is called clarity

Holding on to the soft is called strength

Utilize the light

Return to the clarity

Leaving no disasters for the self

This is called following constancy

RETURN TO ORIGIN

When creation began, Tao became the world's mother. When one knows one's mother he will m turn know that he is her son. When he recognizes his sonship, he will in turn keep to his mother and to the end of life will be free from danger.

He who closes his mouth and shuts his sense gates will be free from trouble to the end of life. He who opens his mouth and meddles with affairs cannot be free from trouble even to the end of life.

To recognize one's insignificance is called enlightenment. To keep one's sympathy is called strength. He who uses Tao's light returns to Tao's enlightenment and does not surrender his person to perdition. This is called practicing the eternal.

The world (t'ien hsia) has an origin (shih),

Which is the world's (t'ien hsia) mother (mu).

Having reached the mother,

(We) know her child.

Having known the child,

Return and abide by its mother.

(In this way) one loses the body without becoming exhausted.

Stop the apertures (tui),

Close the doors,

(In this way) one's whole life (shen) is without toil (ch'in).

Open the apertures,

Going about the affairs,

(In this way) one's whole life (shen) cannot be saved.

To see the small is called illumination (ming).

To abide by the soft is called strength.

Use the bright light (kuang),

But return to the dim light (ming),

Do not expose your life (shen) to perils,

Such is to follow (hsi) the everlasting (ch'ang).

The beginning of the universe may be considered its mother. Knowing the mother the sons can be known; kowing the sons we can keep close to the mother. Thus life finds security within itself.

Eyes closed, mouth shut, life is without trouble. Eyes open, busily conversant, life is without hope.

Whoever sees the most minute sees clearest. Whoever cherishes the weak has the most strength. Whoever uses enlightenment has bright vision. Thus, no harm is done. This is following Tao.

The world's Source, the Mother of all things.

Knowing the Mother, we know her children.

Knowing the children, but holding on to the Mother,

we are free from the fear of death.

Stop talking, withdraw from the rat–race, and life is full.

Blab on, lose yourself in busy–ness, and life is lost.

Seeing the small requires good vision.

Yielding is strength.

Turn to the Inner Light, and find the eternal.

Fifty-two

The beginning of the universe

Is the mother of all things.

Knowing the mother, one also knows the sons.

Knowing the sons, yet remaining in touch with the mother,

Brings freedom from the fear of death.

Keep your mouth shut,

Guard the senses,

And life is ever full.

Open your mouth,

Always be busy,

And life is beyond hope.

Seeing
the small is insight;

Yielding to force is strength.

Using the outer light, return to insight,

And in this way be saved from harm.

This is learning constancy.

The universe has a beginning (Tao);

The beginning functions as the mother of all things.

If you know the mother,

You can get to know her children (all things);

If, while knowing the children,

You keep the mother,

You will be a sage all your life.

Block the openings (of knowledge),

Shut the door (of desires),

And you will be free from illness all your life.

Unlock the openings,

Add to your cares,

And you will be incurable all your life.

To be able to perceive the minute is called discernment;

To be able to play the role of the weak is called the strong.

Use the light

To return to the intrinsic discernment

And you will be free from disasters.

This is called the eternal Tao.

All under Heaven has its beginning,

Which may be regarded as the mother of all under Heaven.

Having recognized its mother,

You know the child, also;

Having known the child,

You hold fast to its mother, also.

Thus you will be free of danger till the end of your life.

Block the holes,

Shut the gates,

And you will never be spent till your last day.

Open up the holes,

Busy yourself with activities,

And you will never be saved till your last day.

To see what is small is called clear sight;

To hold fast to what is soft is called strength.

Use the light,

Return to clear sight,

And you will never bring misfortune upon yourself.

This is called following the constant.

The world has its beginning.

It is the mother of the world (Dao).

Once you have understood the mother,

You should then begin to learn more about the son (evolution).

While learning more about the son,

You must always stick to the principles of Dao (mother).

Thus, you will never be in any danger in your whole life.

If you block out your senses, you will be calm and insouciant.

If you allow your cognitive processes to intervene with your daily affairs, you will be irremediably mired by harassment.

You have insightful wisdom if you are able to discern the minutiae in every affair.

Adhering to the principle of yielding, you are resolutely strong.

Igniting the spark of intuitive mindfulness, you thus rekindle your insightful wisdom.

Consequently, you will never court any disaster.

This is simply following the way of Dao.

Return to the Origin

Kuei Yuan

The world has a beginning as its mother.

Having got hold of the mother,

Know her children;

And having known the children,

Further hold on to the mother,

And you will survive the disappearance of the body.

Stop up the aperture of the vessel (tui),

And shut the doors (of the senses),

And you will not be devitalized all your life.

Open the aperture of the vessel,

And fulfill your carnal affairs,

And your whole life will be beyond salvation.

To be able to see the minute is to have keen vision;

To be able to remain docile is to be strong.

Make use of the light,

Withdraw its brilliance inward,

Cause no injury to your body -

This is called "Abide by the Immutable."

The source of all manifested things in the universe

May be caled the Mother.

Hw who knows his kinshp with the Mother

Will know his kinship with the children twoo.

He knows the children but clings the close to the Mother.

And though his body may decay,

He himself will never perish.

"Close your mouth; keep shut all the doors,

And your vigour shall last to the end."

Open your mouth, busy yourself with numberless affairs,

And there is no help for you.

To see the smallest is to have clear vision;

To hold fast to the gentlest is to be strong.

Use your light to light you to the light within,

And no harm can ever befall you.

This is called: Holding to the Never-changing.

Beneath-heaven has a beginning:

The mother of beneath-heaven.

Knowing the mother.

We may know the children.

Knowing the children,

We may keep to the mother.

Death of body? No risk!

Block the passages,

Shut the doors:

End of life? No fuss!

Open the passages,

Meddle with things:

End of life? No help!

See the small: that is insight.

Keep to weakness: that is strength.

Use the light: go back to insight,

Keeping away from calamity

And practicing the changeless.

All of creation has a common beginning.

This common beginning is the Mysterious Mother of all.

If we know the Mother, we may know her offspring.

Know the offspring, yet stay with the Mother,

and the essence of your life will never be exhausted, even though your body be dissolved.

Block the openings, shut the doors,

and to the end of your days, you will not be worn out.

Unblock the openings, multiply your activities,

and to the end of your days, you will be beyond remedy.

Thus it is said:

To perceive the subtle is to have true vision.

To be soft is to be truly strong.

Use the outer light, but return to the inner.

In this way, you will restore your integral virtue,

and be preserved from all harm.

LII.

Returning
Home to the First Cause

When
all under heaven had beginning, thereby

The
Mother of the World came to be,

When
one knows the mother, he will next know the child.

Who
keeps to the mother, and remains unbeguiled,

Though
his body die, from danger will be free.

Who
keeps close his mouth and the gates of the sense,

When
his body ends, from trouble will be free,

Who
keeps his mouth open, and meddles with affair
.,

When
his body ends,
has
no immunity.

To
see what is small, this is called enlightenment,

To
keep what is tender, this is strength,

Make
use of the Light, returning home to its source,

You
will lose not your body in calamity s course,

And
will train with the Eternal at length.

While in the world gain possession of the Life-Spring in order that you may become a World-Mother.

When you have attained to Motherhood you will know your children.

When you know your children you will retain your Motherhood.

Then, though the body may disappear, You will not be hurt.

Close the door of the mouth,

Shut the doors of the senses,

Throughout life your body will not be fatigued.

Open your mouth,

Increase your business affairs,

Throughout life your body will not be safe.

To perceive the small is called clear vision.

To guard the weak is called strength.

Follow the Light, you will reflect its radiance.

Neglect the Inner Life, your body will meet with calamity.

This is called the eternal heritage.

All-under Heaven

have a common Beginning

This Beginning is

the Mother of the world.

Having known the Mother,

We may proceed to know her children.

Having known the children,

We should go back and hold on to the Mother

In so doing, you will take no risk

Even though your body be destroyed.

Block all the passage ways!

Shut all the doors!

And to the end of your days

you will not be worn out.

Open the passages!

Multiply your activities!

And to the end of your days you will remain helpless.

To see the small is

to have insight.

To hold on to flexibility is

to be strong.

If, in using your factual intelligence

You return to your insight.

You will not bring destruction

upon yourself.

This is the way of learning the Changeless.

All-under-heaven has a beginning which may be regarded as the mother of All-under-heaven. Having found the mother one may know the children. If, knowing the children, one still keeps to the mother, until the end of his life one is not in peril.

Stop its apertures, close its doors, and until the (natural) completion of the body (your strength) will not fail.

Open its apertures, promote its activities and until the (natural) completion of the body nothing will avail.

To perceive what is small is (clear) vision; to keep to what is weak is strength.

If using the light, one resorts to one's vision, the body will not be exposed to any harm. This is called "practicing what is constant".

(The Tao) which originated all under the sky is to be

considered as the mother of them all.

When
the mother is found, we know what her children should be.

When one knows that he is his mother's child, and proceeds to guard

(the qualities of) the mother that belong to him, to the end of his

life he will be free from all peril.

Let
him keep his mouth closed, and shut up the portals (of his

nostrils), and all his life he will be exempt from laborious exertion.

Let him keep his mouth open, and (spend his breath) in the promotion

of his affairs, and all his life there will be no safety for him.

The
perception of what is small is (the secret of clear-

sightedness; the guarding of what is soft and tender is (the secret

of) strength.

Who
uses well his light,

Reverting to its (source so) bright,

Will from his body ward all blight,

And hides the unchanging from men's sight.

Everything under heaven has a beginning
which may be thought of as the
mother of everything.
Having realized the mother, you thereby know her children.

Knowing her children, go back and abide with the mother:
To the end
of your days, you will not be imperiled!
Quiet
the orifices of your heart; stop beckoning at that door:
and for the rest
of your days you will not suffer.
Arouse your passions; meddle with affairs:

and your life will be beyond helping.
Seeing
what is small is called 'insight.'
Abiding in serenity is 'strength.'
Use
ANKH your light to return to 'insight.'
Be not an inheritor of personal calamity!

This
is "remaining constant."

All
things emerge from nullity

The only derivation

Of everything that manifests

The source of all creation

Stay
in touch with origin

There's nothing that you need deny

Seeing your totality

You will not fear to die

Do
not be in haste to speak

And always guard the senses

You will find your heart at peace

And in the place where all commences

See
the subtle and the clear

It is the empty source of light

There is no danger in this place

That is forever in plain sight

ALL-under-Heaven have a common Beginning.

This Beginning is the Mother of the world.

Having known the Mother,

We may proceed to know her children.

Having known the children,

We should go back and hold on to the Mother.

In so doing, you will incur no risk

Even though your body be annihilated.

Block all the passages!

Shut all the doors!

And to the end of your days you will not be worn out.

Open the passages!

Multiply your activities!

And to the end of your days you will remain helpless.

To see the small is to have insight.

To hold on to weakness is to be strong.

Use the lights, but return to your insight.

Do not bring calamities upon yourself.

This is the way of cultivating the Changeless.

In the beginning was the Tao; this beginning can be considered as the mother of all.

Knowing the mother, one can come to know the children.

Knowing the children, but returning to the mother; this will keep your spirit alive through death and decay.

Keep your mouth shut, close the doors of desire, and you will live a virtuous and untroubled existence.

But if you let your mouth go on, and let the desires of the world into your heart, your life will be one of unending toil and vexations.

To see the small, obscure and detailed is clarity of vision.

To live in gentleness and flexibility is strength.

Use outlook and insight, and return to clear-sightedness Then you will avoid life's troubles.

This is called cultivating consistency.

The world had a beginning

which we call the Great Mother.

Once we have found the Mother,

we begin to know what Her children should be.

When
we know we are the Mothers child,

we begin to guard the qualities of the Mother in us.

She will protect us from all danger

even if we lose our life.

Keep
your mouth closed

and embrace a simple life,

and you will live care-free until the end of your days.

If you try to talk your way into a better life

there will be no end to your trouble.

To
understand the small is called clarity.

Knowing how to yield is called strength.

To use your inner light for understanding

regardless of the danger

is called depending on the Constant.

All creation consists of polarities. The fundamental polarity of creation is called Plus/Minus. Yin/Yang, or Feminine/Masculine.

This fundamental polarity is self-impregnating. It is an androgynous womb which produces everything.

Everything includes me. I am a process consisting of polarities, which develop according to the single principle. I am a child of God. I come from the womb of creation.

This knowledge gives me stability.

If I were to put my faith in some thing or person or creed, I would have no stability. People and things and creeds come and go and change all the time. I would live in fear that the thing I adore would be lost, or the person I obeyed would die, or the creed I followed would be altered.

So my only allegiance is to the single principle.

I can look at a person and see both principle and process in them. I can see how they work. I can see them actually working. That is the basis of my ability as a group leader.

From knowing how things work, I also know the importance of staying flexible. Everything that grows is flexible. All enduring strength is flexible.

I know too that my allegiance to principle and process means that I am not afraid of dying. I have nothing to lose. I know that I am an aspect of the Eternal. My home is the womb of creation. Dying is going home.

The World has an origin

Which we may regard as the Mother of the Universe.

Knowing the Mother, we can also come to know her children.

Knowing the children, return and hold fast to the Mother.

Doing this, you will not meet with danger your whole life long.

close your mouth Go easy on the senses And life will not be so hard.

If you spend your life filling your senses

And rushing around "doing" things

You will be beyond hope.

To concern yourself with the beautiful and small

is true wisdom.

To foster gentleness is true strength. Choose to do what is wise and

return to wisdom

Then you will avoid life's troubles.

This is called practicing consistency.

Infinity
is the mother of all things.

Remembering Infinity, one knows

the nature of children.

Knowing the nature of the children

keeps one focused on the oneness of

Infinity.

Remembering
your oneness with Infinity

and the immortality of Infinity

overcomes the fear of death.

Contemplate
Infinity,

accept all things without distinctions and

judgments,

and life will be peaceful and

harmonious.

Think
about reality,

distinguish and judge all things,

and life degenerates into confusion.

Seeing
differences is called distinguishing.

Remaining indifferent manifests peace and

harmony.

Understanding
the nature of oneness

focuses one on Infinity

and away from the confusion of

misfortune.

This is called abiding in the constant.

The World had a beginning, there is a Mother of the World.

Since we have the Mother, we can know the Child.

By knowing the Child, we can return to the Mother.

The disappearance of the Body is not to be feared.

Complete the exchange, close the door;

be done with a body that no longer serves.

Begin the exchange, relieve its troubles,

the death of the body cannot be prevented.

See these unimportant things clearly.

Accept Weakness, use its Emptiness,

Rejoin its Purity, regardless of the body's demise.

This is quite normal.

All things under Heaven have the same source;

This may be called the Mother of the Ten Thousand Things.

Knowing the mother,

One may know the children.

Knowing the children,

One may keep to the mother,

And to the end of one's days, never meet with danger.

Whosoever closes the mouth

And shuts the doors1

Will be free from trouble throughout his life.

But whosoever opens the mouth

And adds to his affairs,

To the end of his days, will be beyond hope.

To see the small is to be enlightened.

To keep to the weak is to be strong.

Use the light of your intellect,

But return to enlightenment,

And thus avoid misfortune.

This is called practising the constant.

1. of the senses.

The earliest beginning we can trace

Can be taken as the mother.

When we have come to know the mother,

We can then trace the son.

When we have found the son,

We should go back to stay with the mother.

Staying with the mother,

We are on the safest spot for our life.

Shut the eyes and cover the ears,

And one can stay away from worry all one's life.

Opening the door and rushing about all the time

Will not help save one from cares and trouble.

One who understands subtle details is wise.

One who keeps weakness is strong.

By adopting that subtle insight in the world,

One can avoid any danger.

That is called the inheritance of what is eternal.

The world has a Source, the Mother of the World.

Once you get the Mother then you understand the children. Once you understand the children turn back and watch over the Mother. As to destroying the self, there will be nothing to fear.

Close your eyes shut your doors, till the end of your life you will not get tired.

Open your eyes carry on your business, till the end of your life you will not be safe.

Keeping your eyes on the Small Thing is called Clarity watching over Weakness is called strength.

Engage with the flashing things turn back to Clarity do not deliver yourself to disaster. This is cultivating Steadiness.

The material world has its Source, Which is the Mother of the material world.

When the Mother is cognized, then it becomes easier to know Her Children*.

Knowing the Children, one should not forget about the Mother. Then one lives life without troubles.

If one abandons personal desires and becomes free from worldly passions, then such a person lives without getting tired.

On the other hand, if one indulges his passions and becomes immersed in worldly affairs, then troubles are unavoidable.

To see the Subtlest is the true clearness of vision.

Preservation of the subtlety of consciousness ensures true power.

Contemplate the Light of Tao! Cognize Its Depths! It is the true Treasure! Do not lose It — and you will avoid many troubles!

* Te.

Tao is the cause of everything.

By knowing the cause, the effects could be known.

Even from the middle of manifestations, the cause could be seen.

Thus
the Wise Person lives in harmony,

He doesn't take any front position thus he is protected

Thus all problems are avoided.

The Wise Person can see the cause of things.

Being able to see the cause he can know the manifestations.

Being soft it is his strength, expanding he is always in harmony.

This is the way he lives in eternity.

The
world has a beginning that acts as its mother. Once one attains to the mother,
one can know the child. Having known the child, return to holding to the mother.
Then one will be in no danger though one should lose one's body. Plug your orifices,
close your gates, and you will be toil-free to the end of your life. If you
open your orifices in order to aid in your endeavors then you will never be
rescued to the end of your days. To see the minute is called discernment. To
hold to the pliant is called strength. To use your inner light to return once
more to discernment and thus avoid abandoning yourself to danger is to depend
on the Constant.

The world had a beginning

Which was the mother of the world.

Having known the mother, we know the son.

Having known the son, we keep the mother.

Thus, through life, we are without danger.

Block the passage;

Shut the door;

Throughout life there will be no toil.

Open the passage;

Multiply the activities;

Throughout life there will be no cure.

To discern the small is called enlightenment;

To preserve weakness is called strength.

Use the light;

Return to enlightenment;

Leave nothing to harm the body;

This is called practicing the constant.

Returning to Insight

The beginning of the world

May be regarded as the Mother of the world.

To apprehend the Mother,

Know the offspring.

To know the offspring

Is to remain close to the Mother,

And free from harm throughout life.

Block the passages,

Close the doors;

In the end, life is idle.

Open the pasages,

Increase undertakings;

In the end, life is hopeless.

To perceive the small is called insight.

To remain yielding is called strength.

If, in using one's brightness,

One returns to insight,

Life will be free of misfortune.

This is called learning the Absolute.

Before the illusion of time existed, there was the Dao. From it, everything comes and everything goes. Judging goes against the Dao. Do so and you will never have peace. Be clear like the undisturbed lake. Be strong like the yielding tree.

It began with a matrix:

The world had a mother

Whose sons can be known

As ever, by her.

But if you know them,

You'll keep close to her

As long as you live

And suffer no harm.

Stop
up your senses;

Close up your doors;

Be not exhausted

As long as you live.

Open your senses;

Be busier still:

To the end of your days

There's no help for you.

You
are bright, it is said,

If you see what is small;

A store of small strengths

Makes you strong.

By the use of its light,

Make your eyes again bright

From evil to lead you away.

This
is called "practicing constancy."

All the things in the world have their origin in something, which is their foundation (mother).

Having grasped the Mother as the foundation of all things, one can know her children as all things.

Having grasped the children as the thing, one must hold to the Mother as the foundation of all things.

Thus one will never encounter danger all his life.

Blocking the vent (of knowledge) and closing the door (of knowledge) can keep one from sickness all his life.

Opening the vent (of knowledge) and completing the enterprise (of knowledge) will make one helpless all his life.

So, perceiving the minute is "sagaciousness,"

Remaining soft and weak is "powerfulness."

Using one's contained light and reverting to one's sagaciousness of knowing the minute,

And thus keeping oneself from disaster, is to become accustomed to the eternal Way.

All under Heaven has a generatrix, which we regard as the mother of all under Heaven.

Once one has access to the mother, through it he can know the child.

Once one knows the child, if he again holds on to the mother, as long as he lives, no danger shall befall him.

Block up your apertures; close your door,

And to the end of your life you will never be exhausted.

But if you open your apertures and deal consciously with things, to the end of your life you will never have relief.

To see the small is called "perspicacious."

To hold on to softness is called "strength."

Make use of its brightness,

But always let its brightness revert.

Never let one's person be exposed to disaster: this is a matter of practicing constancy.

1. The world had a beginning,

2. Which can be considered the mother of the world.

3. Having attained the mother, in order to understand her children.

4. If you return and hold on to the mother, till the end of your life you'll
suffer no harm.

5.
Block up the holes;

6. Close the doors;

7. And till the end of your life you'll not labor.

8. Open the holes;

9. Meddle in affairs;

10. And till the end of your life you'll not be saved.

11.
To receive the small is called "discernment."

12. To hold on to the pliant is called "strength."

13. If you use the rays to return to the bright light,

14. You'll not abandon your life to peril.

15. This is called Following the Constant.

Everything starts
with Tao,

the mother of all things.

If you know the mother,

you know the children.

If you know the children

and remember the mother,

you have nothing to fear in your life.

Shut your mouth
and keep still,

and your life will be full of happiness.

If you talk all the time,

always doing something,

your life will be hopeless.

It takes insight
to see subtlety.

It takes strength

to yield gently to force.

Use that strength

to hang on to your insight,

and you will always be at peace.

That's how to get right with Tao.

.

Practicing the Eternal

The beginning of the universe is the mother of all things.

Those who discover the mother understand the children.

Understanding the children and returning to the mother,

they live always free from harm.

Close the mouth, shut the doors,

and all of life is without strain.

Open the mouth, meddle with affairs,

and all of life is beyond help.

Seeing the small is insight;

to stay with the gentle is strength.

Use the Light, return to insight,

and thereby be preserved from harm.

This is practicing the eternal.

The Light-abyss of the Tao is the Mother of all beings.

One who recognizes the Mother knows that he is a child of God.

Aware of his filiation he is on his way home.

Returning home he is lifted out of impermanence.

One who shuts his sense-gates and keeps silent lives without trouble.

But one who turns his senses outward and opens his mouth remains a slave of fear and death.

One who sees the origin in all is enlightened and who like growing things preserves his softness is strong.

One who loses the Inner Light loses nothing at the passing of his body,

Shining in Tao he is heir to the Eternal.

Learning The Absolute

Lao Tze says,

Since the beginning of the universe, there was the Tao which may be regarded as the mother of all existence.

When a man knows about the mother, he has to know about the son.

When he knows about the son, he proceeds to guard the mother that belongs to him, to the end of his life he will be free from all peril.

Let him keep his mouth closed, and shut up his eyes, and all his life he will be exempt from toil.

Let him keep his mouth open, and his eyes be used to examine the affairs, and all his life there will not be safety for him.

The perception of smallness is clear-sighted;

the guard of the soft and tender grows strong.

He who uses his light reverting to become bright, will ward all blight from his eyesight.

This is the so-called learning of the absolute.

RETURNING TO THE SOURCE

The
virtue of Tao governs its natural way.

Thus, he who is at one with it,

is one with everything which lives,

having freedom from the fear of death.

Boasting,
and hurrying hither and thither,

destroy the enjoyment of a peace filled life.

Life
is more fulfilled by far,

for he who does not have desire,

for he does not have desire,

has no need of boasting.

Learn
to see the insignificant and small,

grow in wisdom and develop insight,

that which is irrevocable,

do not try to fight,

and so be saved from harm.

In the beginning was the Tao.

All things issue from it;

all things return to it.

To find the origin,

trace back the manifestations.

When you recognize the children

and find the mother,

you will be free of sorrow.

If you close your mind in judgements

and traffic with desires,

your heart will be troubled.

If you keep your mind from judging

and aren't led by the senses,

your heart will find peace.

Seeing into darkness is clarity.

Knowing how to yield is strength.

Use your own light

and return to the source of light.

This is called practicing eternity.

The universe has its mother - Dao,

The world has its mother - the universe.

As we already know the mother of the universe - Dao, we should know how to rule her son - the world.

As we already know her son - the world, we should know how to follow his mother - Dao.

By so doing, there will be no discontinuation of life even though a human body will die.

Close the entrances to attractions and control the excess of desires, till the end of life, there will be no effort to work.

Open the entrances to attractions, multiply excess of desires, till the end of life, there will be no completion of work.

One who knows a limited truth is intelligent.

To be gentle is to be strengthened.

One who uses his bright senses and recovers his enlightenment will not let himself be in a perilous situation.

This is called the awareness of eternity.

The world begins with the mother as its source.

When you have the mother, you know the son.

When you know the son, return to preserve the mother.

Although the body dies, there is no harm.

By closing your mouth and shutting the door, there would be no wearing down of life.

When opening the mouth and pursuing your affairs, life cannot be preserved.

Seeing what is small is discernment.

Preserving subtleness is strength.

Using the light enables one to return to discernment.

Without losing the center of the body is called penetrating the eternal.

LII

What
womb gave birth to the world?

Know that mother and you will come to understand her children

Embrace her and you will never suffer harm

Block
up the holes, close the doors

Do without doing, and you will never labor

Open the doors, intrude yourself on the world

Act with force, and your troubles will not end

See
the smallest signs, bend at their lightest touch

And let the subtlest rays lead you

Back to the bright light

The World Has a Beginning

The world has a beginning

that is the mother of the world.

Once you've found the mother,

thereby you know the child.

Once you know the child,

you return to keep the mother,

not perishing though the body die.

Close your eyes, shut your doors,

and you do not toil all your life.

Open your eyes, carry out your affairs,

and you are not saved all your life.

Seeing the small is called clarity;

keeping flexible is called strength.

Using the shining radiance,

you return again to the light,

not leaving anything to harm yourself.

This is called entering the eternal.

The world has an origin.

The origin is the mother.

Knowing the mother, we know the son.

Knowing the son, we deduce the mother.

This way, we can be successful.

Plugging leakages,

Closing openings,

We can never be depleted.

Opening leakages,

Making too many commitments,

We can be hopeless.

Those who pay attention to details are wise.

Those who exercise flexibility are strong.

Use the light,

Things are illuminated.

Thus we can avoid mistakes.

This is called normal behavior.

The world has its root.

This root is the mother of the world.

If you know the mother, you know her children.

If you know the children, you should go back and hold on to the mother.

In so doing, to the end of your days you will incur no risk.

Block all the passages, shut all the doors: to the end of your days you will not be worn out.

Open the passages, multiply your activities: to the end of your days you will remain helpless.

To see the small is to have insight.

To hold on to weakness is to be strong.

To use the lights, to return to insight, not to bring calamities upon oneself, this is the way of cultivating the constant.

There is a beginning for the universe,

the mother of everything.

Knowing the mother, knows the sons.

Knowing the sons, knows the mother.

Knowing these, becomes immortal.

Plug your openings (9 for man's body),

shut the gate,

and life is ever full.

Open you openings (for some schools, specially care about the gate for semen).

Always be busy (such as: having sex),

life is beyond hope.

Value the small (such as semen or any insignificant things) is insight.

Yielding (as woman) is strength.

Using the light , return to insight (such as transform semen into spirit),

body will not be harmed.

Practice this constantly.

All things under heaven had a common beginning,

and that beginning could be considered

the Mother of all things.

When you know the Mother

you will also know the children.

Know the children, yet hold fast to the Mother,

and to the end of your days

you will be free from danger.

Block
the passages!

Shut the doors!

And, to the end of your days

your strength will not fail you.

Open the passages!

Increase your activities!

And, to the end of your days

you will be beyond help.

See
the small and develop clear vision.

Practice yielding and develop strength.

Use the outer light to return to the inner light,

and save yourself from harm.

This
is known as following the Always-so.

We
attribute the creation of many things to a

ent

and so we imagine a beginner of all creation

and call it god or Dao or the Big Bang.

Knowing the origin we know the children.

Knowing the children we understand the origin better.

Knowing the one we know the many

knowing the many we know the one better.

Close your eyes, shut your doors,

and you will live forever.

Turn on the tv, become involved, get busy,

and you become vulnerable to everything.

Seeing
small things clearly is good vision;

holding on to weak things is strength.

Seeing the outer light yet being able to return to the inner light

seeing the many and being able to return to the one

a person survives.

This is called

returning.

There was a [bang] start of the universe, call it the mother of the world.

Who has found that mother dao, also understands [some of] her sons (things)
by it. From the mother, we can know her sons.

Having understood some sons, yet keep to the inner, subtle mother.

Who has known the sons will hold to the mother, for one's whole life can be
protected from danger by it. [So they say.]

Shut
down life's various openings. Close its doors, and till the end your strength
may remain. Next, your whole life can seem without toil.

On
the other hand; open the mouth busy about affairs, and to the end of life there
will be no help or salvation coming to you [from the outer realm].

Good
sight implies seeing what's very small. Seeing what's small is called [Zen]
enlightenment.

Who
stays by some good conduct is strong. So use the light and return to clear sight
through the bright light of the subtle, shining inner realm [debated in Buddhism]

By this art, never cause yourself future distress, [but see well in advance
by the inner realm's sight and bright light; or just psyche such things out,]
thereby preserved from most harm.

This is called resorting to the always-so, or practising the eternal.

That act is also called to steal the absolute.

Everything under heaven has a beginning which may be thought of as the mother of all under heaven.

Having realized the mother, you thereby know her children.

Knowing her children, go back to abide with the mother.

To the end of your life, you will not be imperiled.

Stopple the orifices of your heart,

Close your doors;

your whole life you will not suffer.

Open the gate of your heart,

Meddle with affairs;

your whole life you will be beyond salvation.

Seeing what is small is called insight,

Abiding in softness is called strength.

Use your light to return to insight,

Be not an inheritor of personal calamity.

This is called "following the constant."

That from which the universe sprang may be looked upon as its Mother.

By knowing the Mother you have access to the child.

And if, knowing the child, you prefer the Mother, though your body perish, yet you will come to no harm.

Keep your mouth shut, and close up the doors of sight and sound, and as long as you live you will have no vexation.

But open your mouth, or become inquisitive, and you will be in trouble all your life long.

To perceive things in the germ is intelligence.

To remain gentle is to be invincible.

Follow the light that guides you homeward, and do not get lost in the darkness.

This I call using the eternal.

Look to the Beginning

If you trace problems in your relationship

back to the beginning

you will find their seeds

were sown and then ignored.

They grew unnoticed until their fruit

ripened and surprised you.

But if you can find

where the seeds were sown,

there you will find the roots as well.

And if you remove the roots

your problems will wither.

The real issues are seldom what they appear to be.

Look deeply into your conflicts.

What little seed,

planted long ago,

is coming into bloom?

When you find the origins

do not recriminate each other

or worry about who sowed the seed.

Pull out the roots.

There was a beginning of the universe Which may be called the Mother of the Universe.

He who has found the mother (Tao) And thereby understands her sons
(things), And having understood the sons, Still keeps to its mother,
Will be free from danger throughout his lifetime.

Close the mouth. Shut the doors (of cunning and desires). And to the end of life there will be (peace) without toil.

Open the mouth. Meddle with affairs. And to the end of life there will be no salvation.

Seeing what is small is called enlightenment. Keeping to weakness is called strength.

Use the light. Revert to enlightenment. And thereby avoid danger to one's life - This is called practicing the eternal.

The source of
life

Is as a mother.

Be fond of both mother and children but know the mother dearer

And you outlive death.

Curb your tongue and senses

And you are beyond trouble,

Let them loose

And you are beyond help.

Discover that nothing is too small for clear vision,

Too insignificant for tender strength~

Use outlook

And insight,

Use them both

And you are immune:

For you have witnessed eternity.

Since the beginning of the world, the DAO has been the mother of everything.

If you know the mother, the DAO, you know the child, the world.

Knowing the world, but also keeping the DAO, will prevent disasters throughout your life.

If you shut off your senses and desires, you will not have any trouble throughout your life;

If you open your senses and you do things for your own purposes, you cannot be saved throughout your life.

By focusing on the minor and subtle, your vision is clear;

By staying on the side of weak, you are strong.

Using the "light" of the world, but also keeping the "light source" of the DAO,

Will bring no harm to you and make you natural and long-lasting.

The universe has an origin, the Matrix of Creation,

Functioning as the Mother of the world.

If you know the Mother, you will know her children.

If you know her children while abiding with the Mother,

Though your body may be dissolved,

Your life-energy will remain inexhaustible.

Close the cracks, close the doors of the senses,

Then, till the end of your life you will not be drained of energy.

Open the cracks and react to external stimulations,

Then, till the end of your life you will not be saved from suffering.

To perceive the subtle is enlightenment.

To abide in gentleness is strength.

Use your inner light to return to enlightenment

And you will not inherit any harm.

This is called "learning the eternal lesson."

The earliest beginning we can trace

Can be taken as the mother.

When we have come to know the mother,

We can then trace the son.

When we have found the son,

We should go back to stay with the mother.

Staying with the mother,

We are on the safest spot for our life.

Shut the eyes and cover the ears,

And one can stay away from worry all one's life.

Opening the door and rushing about all the time

Will not help save one from cares and trouble.

One who understands subtle details is wise.

One who keeps weakness is strong.

By adopting that subtle insight in the world,

One can avoid any danger.

That is called the inheritance of what is eternal.

In the beginning was the Tao; this beginning can be considered as the mother of all.

Knowing the mother, one can come to know the children.

Knowing the children, but returning to the mother; this will keep your spirit alive through death and decay.

Keep your mouth shut, close the doors of desire, and you will live a virtuous and untroubled existence.

But if you let your mouth go on, and let the desires of the world into your heart,

your life will be one of unending toil and vexations.

To see the small, obscure and detailed is clarity of vision.

To live in gentleness and flexibility is strength.

Use outlook and insight, and return to clear-sightedness Then you will avoid life's troubles.

This is called cultivating consistency.

