===== Chapter 64 =====

The stabilized is easy to grasp.

The not-yet-begun is easy to plan for.

The brittle is easy to break.

The tiny is easy to scatter.

Act upon it while it does not yet exist.

Govern it while it is not yet chaotic.

The tree [as thick as] joined arms embraced

Comes into existence at an insignificant height.

The platform of nine stories is built by piling up dirt.

The journey of a thousand miles begins with a [single] step.

Those who contrive, ruin them.

Those who grasp, lose them.

Therefore, the sages

Do not contrive and therefore do not ruin.

Do not grasp and therefore do not lose.

The undertakings of the people:

[They see] matters frequently [through] to near-completion

But ruin them [toward the end].

Act with care in the end just as in the beginning

[And you] will not ruin the matter.

Therefore, the sages

Desire not to desire

And do not value goods that are hard to get.

Learning "un-learning"

They return to the place the masses of people have [all] passed by.

Therefore, they assist the true natures of the ten-thousand things

And do not dare to contrive.

At rest is easy to hold. Not yet impossible is easy to plan. Brittle is easy to break. Fine is easy to scatter.

Create before it exists. Lead before it goes astray.

A tree too big to embrace Is born from a slender shoot. A nine-story
rises from a pile of earth. A thousand-mile journey Begins with a single
step.

Act and you ruin it. Grasp and you lose it. Therefore the Sage Does not
act And so does not ruin Does not grasp And so does not lose.

People commonly ruin their work When they are near success. Proceed at
the end as at the beginning And your work won't be ruined.

Therefore the Sage Desires no desires Prizes no prizes Studies no
studies And returns To what others pass by. The Sage Helps all beings
find their nature, But does not presume to act.

What is at rest is easy to hold.

What has not yet begun is easy to stop.

That which is flimsy is easy to shatter.

That which is tiny is easy to scatter.

Confront the events before they begin.

Set things in order before there is trouble.

A tree bigger than a grown man's embrace

Was once a tiny sprout.

A tower nine stories high

Was built on a lump of dirt.

A journey of a thousand miles

Begins right under your feet.

It's those who take action that fail.

It's those who hold on to things that lose them.

Therefore the sage takes no action,

And so he does not fail.

He doesn't hold on to things,

And so he doesn't lose them.

People always fail when their work is nearly done.

So be cautious when you start

And be cautious when you finish.

That is why the sage desires not to desire

And does not value rare things.

He learns what cannot be learnt

And returns to what others pass by.

He could help the myriad things

Follow their true nature

Yet he dares not do it.

OVERT ACTION

Remaining still, it is easy to hold.

Unmanifest and unforetold, there are no limits for the making of plans.

Being brittle, it is easy to shatter.

Being small, it is easy to disperse.

Deal then with formative troubles before catastrophic events occur -

Create order before confusion can begin.

Truly -

The giant tree begins as a tiny sprout.

The high tower begins as a heap of earth.

The long journey begins as a single step from where one stands.

Overt acting causes harm and failure.

Overt grasping causes loss.

Thus the Sage,

Acting not, neither harms or fails

. Grasping not, does not lose.

How often people fail as, using overt action,

They are just about to succeed.

Being as careful at the end as at the beginning,

Not interfering with the natural course of things,

Failure is averted.

Therefore The Sage:

- Desires to have what is unwanted.

- Values not objects which are difficult to obtain.

- Learns spontaneously without overt "Learning".

- Returns to the tried and true of old,

So that All Things are restored to their own true nature.

Acting spontaneously from inborn direction,

He avoids overt action.

That which is content is easy to hold.

That which does not manifest easily is a scheme.

That which is delicate is easy to dissolve.

That which is mysterious is easy to disperse.

Practice and do not possess.

Govern through not creating discord.

Join and embrace a tree as it grows from a tiny seedling.

A tower of nine stories rises from the Earth.

A thousand li* journey begins when you are sufficiently connected to the Earth.

Those who do, destroy.

Those who seize, lose.

The sages practice not doing (wu wei) and do not destroy.

They do not seize and they do not lose.

The people pursue their worldly affairs, and are often near success, and yet they fail.

When they are as careful to the end as they are in the beginning they will not fail in their worldly affairs.

The sages desires are not deep-seated desires.

They do not value difficult-to-obtain treasures.

They study not studying.

They can help ten-thousand things (everything) naturally and do not venture to act.

* Li=1/3 mile

ATTENDING TO DETAILS

It is easy to grasp what is not yet in motion, to withstand what is not

yet manifest, to break what is not yet compact, to disperse what is not

yet coherent. Act against things before they become visible; attend to

order before disorder ariseth.

The
tree which filleth the embrace grew from a small shoot; the tower

nine-storied rose from a low foundation; the ten-day journey began with a

single step.

He
who acteth worketh harm; he who graspeth findeth it a slip. The wise

man acteth not, so worketh no harm; he doth not grasp, and so doth not

let go. Men often ruin their affairs on the eve of success, because they

are not as prudent at the end as in the beginning.

The
wise man willeth what others do not will, and valueth not things

rare. He learneth what others learn not, and gathered up what they despise.

Thus he is in accord with the natural course of events, and is not overbold

in action.

That which is at rest is easily kept hold of; before a thing has givenindications of its presence, it is easy to take measures against it; thatwhich is brittle is easily broken; that which is very small is easily dispersed.Action should be taken before a thing has made its appearance; order shouldbe secured before disorder has begun. The tree which fills the arms grewfrom the tiniest sprout; the tower of nine storeys rose from a (small)heap of earth; the journey of a thousand li commenced with a single step.He who acts (with an ulterior purpose) does harm; he who takes hold ofa thing (in the same way) loses his hold. (But) people in their conductof affairs are constantly ruining them when they are on the eve of success.If they were careful at the end, as (they should be) at the beginning,they would not so ruin them. Therefore the sage desires what (other men)do not desire, and does not prize things difficult to get; he learns what(other men) do not learn, and turns back to what the multitude of men havepassed by. Thus he helps the natural development of all things, and doesnot dare to act (with an ulterior purpose of his own).

Peace is easy to keep

What might happen is easy to prevent

That which is fragile is easy to break

What's still very small, can be chased away easily

A big tree starts with a small seed

A terrace-yard started with a mound of earth

A thousand-mile journey starts with a single step

One who disturbs the natural order, harms oneself

One who intervenes loses oneself

A wise man abstains far from this

Therefore he won't hurt himself and so he remains himself

But people break down everything and they call it "progress"

Once started, there is no end to

A wise man strives for what others don't

And takes to be important what others take to be unimportant

He unlearns what other are still learning

And turns back to a state of mind others have left

Then he knows the way back to the source

But realizes that the people do not want to hear about it

That which remains quiet is easy to handle. That which has not yet developed is easy to manage, That which is weak is easy to control. That which is still small is easy to direct.

Deal with little troubles before they become big. Attend to little problems before they get out of hand.

For the largest tree was once a sprout, The tallest tower started with a single brick, And the longest journey began with a first stem.

Just as he who tries to hasten what is natural, must fail in his attempt, So he who tries to retard what is natural, must fail in his attempt.

Since the intelligent man does not seek to accelerate, he does not make waste, And since he does not try to restrain, he does not fail. People are as likely to go wrong in not letting things come to their normal conclusions as they are in not letting them start in their own way.

The intelligent man has no desire to redirect and no desire for what is hard to get. He has learned to be unlearned, and returned to the way which learned men have forgoten. He lets each thing develop in its own way, without any attempt to intervene.

"What stays still is easy to hold;

Before there has been an omen it is easy to lay plans.

What is tender is easily torn,

What is minute is easy to scatter."

Deal with things in their state of not-yet-being,

Put them in order before they have got into confusion.

For "the tree big as a man's embrace began as a tiny sprout,

The tower nine storeys high began with a heap of earth,

The journey of a thousand leagues began with what was under the feet".

He who acts, harms; he who grabs, lets slip.

Therefore the Sage does not act, and so does not harm;

Does not grab, and so does not let slip.

Whereas the people of the world, at their tasks,

Constantly spoil things when within an ace of completing them.

"Heed the end no less than the beginning,"

And your work will not be spoiled.

Therefore the Sage wants only things that are unwanted,

Sets no store by products difficult to get,

And so teaches things untaught,

Turning all men back to the things they have left behind,

That the ten thousand creatures may be restored to their Self-so.

This he does; but dare not act.

That which is still is easy to contain.

What has not yet begun is easy to prevent.

The fragile is easily broken.

The minute is easily dispelled.

See things before they emerge.

Attend to them before they grow out of control.

A tree trunk that fills a man's arms

begins as a tiny shoot.

A terrace nine stories high

begins with a basket of dirt.

A journey of a thousand miles

begins underfoot.

Those who strive meet defeat.

Those who grasp lose their grip.

The sage does nothing and never fails.

He has nothing and never loses.

Failure often comes on the verge of success.

Be as careful in the end as the beginning

and there will be no failure.

The sage desires no-desire.

He does not value wealth.

He learns by not thinking.

He restores to others what has been lost.

He helps the ten thousand things return to original nature

but does not interfere.

What is secure is easy to hold

What has yet to begin is easy to plan for

What is thin is easy to break up

What is minute is easy to scatter

Attend to things before they come to be

Arrange things before they entangle

A tree which fills the joined embrace

Has grown from a slender shoot

A tower which reaches nine stories

Begins as a basket of earth

A journey of a thousand li

Begins from beneath the feet

Those who interfere spoil things

Those who grab lose things

This is why wise ones do not interfere and so do not spoil

Do not grab and so do not lose

People in their pursuits & affairs

(are) ever on the verge of achieving and still ruin things

Take care at the end as well as at the beginning

And then there will be no ruined affairs

This is why wise ones desire to have no desires

Do not prize goods which are hard to obtain

Learn to unlearn

And return to what everyone else has passed by

Thus helping the myriad beings to realize themselves

While not presuming to interfere

Care at the beginning - Care at the end

What is at rest is easy to hold;

What has not yet given a sign, is easy to plan for;

The brittle is easily shattered;

The minute is easily scattered.

Act on it before it comes into being;

Order it before it turns into chaos.

A tree so big as a man's embrace

Starts out as the tiniest shoot;

A terrace of nine stories high

Rises up from a basket of dirt.

A high place of a hundred or thousand feet high

starts under your feet.

Those who act on it ruin it;

Those who hold on to it lose it.

Therefore the Sage does not act,

And as a result, he does not ruin things,

He does not hold on to things,

And as a result, he does not lose things.

In people's handling of affairs,

They always ruin things

When they are right at the point of completion.

Therefore we say, If you are as careful at the end

As you were at the beginning, you will have no failures.

Therefore the Sage seeks freedom from desire

And does not value goods that are hard to obtain.

He learns not to learn

And returns to what the masses pass by.

He could help the ten thousand things

To find their own nature,

Yet he dare not do it.

What has equilibrium is easy to maintain. What hasn't begun is easy to plan. What is fragile is easy to shatter. What is small is easy to scatter.

Deal with things before they arise. Cultivate order before confusion sets in.

The tallest tree springs from a tiny shoot. The tallest tower is built from a pile of dirt. A journey of a thousand miles begins at your feet.

Interfere with things, and you'll be defeated by them. Hold on to things, and you'll lose them. The sage doesn't interfere, so he doesn't fail; doesn't hold on, so he doesn't lose.

Because projects often come to ruin just before completion, he takes as much care at the end as he did at the beginning, and thereby succeeds.

His only desire is to be free of desire. Fancying nothing, learning not to know, electing not to interfere, he helps all beings become themselves.

Affairs in balance are easily arranged.

Trouble that's but faintly manifest

Is resolved through preparation.

Fragile matter is quickly broken;

Small force is easily scattered.

Manage trouble before others see it-

That is, before it becomes troublesome.

The problem that you can barely get your arms around

Grew like a tree from the tenderest sprout.

A tower of trouble rises from a mere hole in the ground.

That march of agony, a thousand miles long,

Began where your feet touch the Earth.

Live by force and you will be destroyed by it.

Take things in your grasp, and they will slip away.

The sage relies on unforced action,

And this upholds the dignity of his effort.

He doesn't clutch at success,

Therefore, he never fails.

Others seem to collapse in failure

At the very threshold of success;

Yet he is humble and cautious

Both at the end and the beginning:

Thus are his affairs brought safely to completion.

Therefore, the sage monitors desire,

Retreats from attachment,

And abandons the accumulation of learning.

Through dropping his excess,

He returns to his essence.

And then, insensibly and effortlessly,

He helps others to do the same.

He does it without a breath of bluster,

For he never presumes upon

The living truth of Nature.

This verse is notable for containing what is perhaps the most famous, and therefore the most misinterpreted, expression from the Tao Te Ching (and perhaps from all of Chinese philosophy), which is usually translated as:

The journey of a thousand miles

Begins with a single step.

As I worked with this couplet and the other metaphors from that second stanza, the question arose: "does Lao Tzu really mean to glorify the tree and the tower, and to have us pursue the "thousand mile journey?" It seems, from the context of the verse itself and the rest of the Tao Te Ching, that the answer to this question would be, in fact, "no." If trouble is best managed "before it becomes troublesome," then we are clearly being asked to perceive the grown tree, the tower, and the long journey, as the metaphorical consequences of "unmanaged trouble." This tilt in perspective gives the poem a pragmatic message, which is consistent with Lao Tzu's insight from other verses, particularly with regard to the metaphor of the long journey.

In other places, Lao Tzu reminds us that we can know the whole world without leaving our doorway, and that the outer wanderer too easily gets trapped in a net of attachment. Thus, Lao Tzu would consider the "long journey" to be the consequence of having failed to identify and retreat from the many short and early steps of ego. This is why the follower of Tao "monitors desire [and] retreats from attachment": so that his self-awareness prevents the necessity of taking any "long journeys"—pointless and dangerous odysseys of seeking and yearning. The farther we wander, the more do we become attached to the saga, until we are trapped in a net of seeking. This leads to increasing misdirection and suffering, so that the way of return is made ever more difficult, as Odysseus himself discovers in Homer's epic poem.

There is another crucial point being made in this verse, which is particularly significant to our time and culture, and it is about time and completion. Lao Tzu warns us of the danger of "collapse in failure" at the very brink of success, and he stresses the importance of humility and caution, especially near the end of a project or undertaking. For this is where the ego's urge for completion is most likely to become careless or obsessive.

What is not moving is easily held.

What has not happened is easily planned.

What is brittle is easily broken.

What is tiny is easily dispersed.

Deal
with a problem before it arises;

exercise control before confusion exists.

A
tree with an arm-girth of trunk grows from a tiny sprout.

A nine-storied terrace arises from a heap of dirt.

A thousand-mile journey begins with the first step.

Action
spoils; reaching loses.

The truly wise are not active.

Thus they do not spoil things.

Do not reach so do not lose.

Things
are often spoiled very close to completion.

Be as careful at completion as you were at the beginning.

Thus
the truly wise want the unwanted

and do not prize what is rare.

Study what is unstudied and preserve what is lost.

Assist in the course of nature but never interfere in it.

Whatever is at rest can easily be taken in hand; while yet no omens have appeared plans can be easily formed.

What is brittle is easily broken; what is minute is easily scattered.

Act before necessity arises; regulate before disorder commences.

The trunk that can scarcely be embraced sprang from a tiny shoot; the tower that is nine stories high was raised from a mound of earth; the journey of a thousand li commenced when the foot was placed on the ground.

Who makes, mars; who grasps, loses.

The Holy man practices non-action, hence he never injures; he never grasps, hence he never loses. The majority are too eager for results in attending to their affairs, and spoil everything. There would be no such failures were they as cautious at the end as at the beginning.

Hence the Holy Man desires passionlessness; he does not prize articles that are rare; he studies to be unlearned; he reverts to that which the masses pass by. In this way he promotes the natural development of things without venturing to interfere.

What is motionless is easy to hold;

What is not yet foreshadowed is easy to form plans for;

What is fragile is easy to break;

What is minute is easy to disperse.

Deal with a thing before it comes into existence;

Regulate a thing before it gets into confusion.

The common people in their business often fail on the verge of succeeding.

Take care with the end as you do with the beginning,

And you will have no failure.

Dealing with the Small.

It is easy to sustain a situation when it is pacified.

It is easy to plan when it doesn't yet show signs of danger.

It is easy to dissolve what is crisp; easy to disperse what is minute.

Deem-act on it in its not-yet-exist phase; order it in its not-yet-disordered
phase.

An armful of wood arises from small sprouts; nine story towers start from a
pile of earth.

A thousand league walk starts with putting the foot down.

Those who deem-act wreck it; those who grasp lose it.

Using this: Sages lack deeming action, hence they lack wrecking, lack grasping
hence lack losing.

The people in pursuing social affairs take the phase of nearly completed as
constant and then wreck it.

If you are as careful at the end as in the beginning then you will lack wrecking
things.

Using this: Sages treat not-desiring as a desire and don't value goods difficult
to obtain.

Study not-studying and restore what the crowd of humanity has passed by.

Use restoring the self-so nature of the ten-thousand natural kinds and don't
recklessly deem-act.

That which is motionless is easy to maintain.

That which is prior to emergence is easy to deal with.

That which is just beginning is easy to destroy.

That which is minute is easy to disperse.

Act on what is before it occurs.

Manage things before they are in disorder.

Big trees grow out of small shoots.

A nine story tower begins to be built from one little lump.

A journey of a thousand miles begins from where one stays.

Those who proceed through action fail.

Those who grasp on to a thing lose it.

Therefore, the wise does not act on things and is free from failure.

He does not grasp on to things, and does not lose them.

People who are engaged with things often fail when they almost complete them.

Therefore, one should be as careful in the last stage of one's work as at the beginning.

Then one will be free from failure.

Hence, for the wise, willing is non-willing.

He never values things which are hard to attain.

He learns what is unlearned.

He avoids the mistakes that have been made by others.

He is in accordance with the nature of ten thousand things, yet he never interferes with them.

It is easy to control a situation when it is tranquil.

It is easy to deal with a matter before the omen is cast.

It is easy to break something when it is fragile.

It is easy to scatter something when it is minute.

Deal with things before they arise.

Govern a situation before it descends into disorder.

A huge tree as great as a man's arm-span grows from a tiny seed.

A nine-storey terrace rises from a pile of earth.

A thousand-mile journey starts from a single footstep.

He who acts to reach something will lead to its decline.

He who tries hard to hold on to something will lose it.

That is why the sage does nothing, and leads nothing to decline.

He does not hold on to anything, therefore he does not lose anything.

People often lead their actions to the verge of success, then fail.

Be careful to treat the end with equal care as the beginning.

Then you will not fail.

Therefore the sage desires not to desire, not to value precious goods,

to learn how not to learn, to cover the mistakes of the multitude,

to assist the myriad creatures according to the law of Nature.

Yet he dares not act.

When stable,

It is easy to maintain;

When no symptoms have emerged,

Easy to deal with;

When tender,

Easy to break;

When tiny,

Easy to disperse.

Tackle it before it takes shape;

Bring order before it becomes chaotic.

A tree the circumference of an embrace

Grows out of a downy tip;

A nine-storied tower

Rises from a basketful of earth;

A hundred-ren ascent

Begins from under one's foot.

He who acts upon them ruins them;

He who holds on to them loses them.

Hence, the sage man acted not

So that he ruined not;

He did not hold on to them

So that he did not lose them.

When people engage in a task,

They often ruin it at its completion.

Therefore, it is said:

"Be discreet in the end as in the beginning,

And you will not ruin your task."

Hence, the sage man

Desired to be desireless,

And treasured not goods hard to come by;

He learned to be unlearned,

And was exempted from the errors

Other rulers had committed;

He was able to assist the ten thousand things

To be the way they were

Without daring to act.

Do a non-deed,

Do a non-action,

Taste tastelessness.

The sage desires non-desire,

And does not value anything rare.

He learns the unlearnable,

But peruses what others have discarded.

Thus he enables all things

To develop in their natural way,

And he does not engage in hasty action.

See the small as big,

See the little as a lot.

Take care of the difficult when it is still easy,

Take care of the big when it is still small.

All difficult things in the world begin as easy things,

All big things in the world begin as small things.

The tree whose trunk cannot be encircled by a man's arms began as a sapling,

A nine-story tower rose from a heap of dirt,

A thousand-mile journey began with the earth under a man's foot.

Therefore the sage does not try to do big things,

And in that way can achieve greatness.

The person who makes casual promises

Will not keep them.

The person who perceives many things as easy

Will encounter many difficulties.

Therefore the sage perceives things as difficult,

And consequently never encounters difficulties.

It is easy to maintain a situation while it is still secure;

It is easy to deal with a situation before symptoms develop;

It is easy to break a thing when it is yet brittle;

It is easy to dissolve a thing when it is yet minute.

Deal
with a thing while it is still nothing;

Keep a thing in order before disorder sets in.

A
tree that can fill the span of a man's arms

Grows from a downy tip;

A terrace nine storeys high

Rises from hodfuls of earth;

A journey of a thousand miles

Starts from beneath one's feet.

Whoever
does anything to it will ruin it;

Whoever lays hold of it will lose it.

Therefore
the sage, because he does nothing, never ruins anything;

And, because he does not lay hold of anything, loses nothing.

In
their enterprises the people

Always ruin them when on the verge of success.

Be as careful at the end as at the beginning

And there will be no ruined enterprises.

Therefore
the sage desires not to desire

And does not value goods which are hard to come by;

Learns to be without learning

And makes good the mistakes of the multitude

In order to help the myriad creatures to be natural and to refrain from daring
to act.

Mind the Insignificant

What is still at rest is easily kept quiet. What has not as yet appeared is easily prevented. What is still feeble is easily broken. What is still scant is easily dispersed.

Treat things before they exist. Regulate things before disorder begins. The stout tree has originated from a tiny rootlet. A tower of nine stories is raised by heaping up [bricks of] clay. A thousand miles' journey begins with a foot.

He that makes mars. He that grasps loses.

The holy man does not make; therefore he mars not. He does not grasp; therefore he loses not. The people when undertaking an enterprise are always near completion, and yet they fail.

Remain careful to the end as in the beginning and you will not fail in your enterprise.

Therefore the holy man desires to be desireless, and does not prize articles difficult to obtain. He learns, not to be learned, and seeks a home where multitudes of people pass by.

He assists the ten thousand things in their natural development, but he does not venture to interfere.

A tall tree requires deep roots, otherwise it will topple. If a problem is prevented, it doesn't arise. If your attainment is brittle it will easily shatter. Small things are easily lost. Don't take short cuts, but deal with everything fully before moving on. If you do this your progress will be steady. A mighty oak rises out of an acorn. A human develops out of a microscopic egg. A thousand mile journey starts with one step. These processes cannot be completed in one act. If you try to make something great happen and overlook the processes involved, you will fail. Only by letting the process play out naturally can you achieve the Tao. Therefore the master doesn't try to achieve. He simply follows the process calmly from start to finish. Death is stalking him, so he has nothing to cling to. His only desire is non-desire; his only learning is to unlearn. He shows people what they have always been. He loves nothing except the Tao. Therefore he can love everything.

Governing is easy when there is peace;

Planning is easy when there is time;

Nipping is easy when buds are young;

Reconciling is easy when issues are minor.

Handle matters before they come about;

Govern people before there is chaos.

A tree two-arms'-length wide grows from a seedling;

A tower nine stories high starts with a spadeful;

A journey a thousand miles long begins with a step.

The populace often fail when they are close to completing their tasks.

Be as deliberate at the end as at the beginning; then, there can be no failure.

Thus, the sage desires what others do not desire, and places no premium on rare goods.

[The sage] studies what others do not study,

and revisits people's faults.

[The sage] assists myriad matters to develop naturally but does not dare to interfere.

It's easy to embrace the tranquil

and easy to prevent trouble before omens appear.

It's easy for the trifling to melt away

and easy for the slight to scatter away.

Work at things before they've begun

and establish order before confusion sets in,

for a tree you can barely reach around

grows from the tiniest rootlet,

a nine-tiered tower

starts as a basket of dirt,

a thousand-mile journey

begins with a single step.

Work at things and you ruin them; cling to things and you lose them.

That's why a sage does nothing and so ruins nothing, clings to nothing and so loses nothing.

When people devote themselves to something they always ruin it on the verge of success.

Finish with the same care you took in beginning and you'll avoid ruining things.

This is why a sage desires without desire,

never longing for rare treasures,

learns without learning,

always returning to what people have passed by,

helps the ten thousand things occur of themselves by never presuming to work at them.

In an orderly state, it is easy to maintain status quo;

Before the appearance of trouble, it is easy to diffuse it.

What is fragile is easy to break;

What is small is easy to scatter.

Prevent problems before they become problems;

Establish rules of order before there is disorder.

A tree of huge proportions is grown from a tiny sapling;

A nine story tower is built from the ground up;

A journey of a thousand li begins under the feet (with the first step).

He who takes willful actions fails;

He who exerts willful control loses it.

So a wise ruler:

Takes no willful action, thus suffers no failure;

Exerts no willful control, thus suffers no loss of it.

People often fail at the sight of success,

Be deft and cautious at the end as at the beginning,

Then there will be no failure.

So a wise ruler:

Desires no selfish desire,

Values no rare commodity,

Learns to unlearn, and

Repairs wrongs done to the multitude.

He thus fosters the natural state of all things, and

He dares no interfere with it.

What
is peaceful is easily maintained

What is not begun is easily planned

What is fragile is easily shattered

What is tiny is easily scattered.

Acting
relates to the not yet present

Governing relates to the not yet confused.

A
tree as big as the embrace of a man is born relating to very tiny shoots

A nine story tower is raised relating to a pile of earth

A journey of a thousand li begins in relating to where you stand.

Those
who act are spoiling

Those who take hold of are losing

Appropriately
it happens that sages are absent of action

So there is an absence of spoiling

Are absent of taking hold of

So there is an absence of losing.

The
following of people of effort in the entire

Relates to perfecting part yet spoiling

Following care throughout as if just beginning

Comes an absence of spoiling effort.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Desire without desiring

Are without treasuring goods difficult to obtain

Learn without learning

Return to the place where the collective mind passes

And come to support the self-nature of the 10000 things

Yet without venturing to act.

Peaceful situations are easily controlled; problems are easily forestalled before they arise; weak things are easily broken; small things are easily dispersed.

One should take one's measures before something happens, and protect order before disorder bursts out.

A tree which one's arms can barely embrace comes from a shoot as fine as a hair; a nine-storey tower begins with a pile of earth; a long journey begins with a single step.

Those who make too much of things, spoil their affairs. Those who grip too strongly, end up by letting go. The Sage who does not act, does not spoil any affair. Since he holds on to nothing, nothing escapes him.

When the common people have affairs, they often fail at the moment when they should have succeeded, (nervousness at the beginning of success making them lose propriety and make clumsy mistakes). For success, the circumspection of the beginning should last until the final achievement.

The Sage desires nothing. He does not prize any object because it is rare. He does not attach himself to any system, but instructs himself by the faults of others. In order to co-operate with universal evolution, he does not act, but lets things go.

When it is peaceful, it is easy to maintain

When it shows no signs, it is easy to plan

When it is fragile, it is easy to break

When it is small, it is easy to scatter

Act on it when it has not yet begun

Treat it when it is not yet chaotic

A tree thick enough to embrace

Grows from the tiny sapling

A tower of nine levels

Starts from the dirt heap

A journey of a thousand miles

Begins beneath the feet

The one who meddles will fail

The one who grasps will lose

Therefore, sages do not meddle and thus do not fail

They do not grasp and thus do not lose

People, in handling affairs

Often come close to completion and fail

If they are as careful in the end as the beginning

Then they would have no failure

Therefore, sages desire not to desire

They do not value goods that are hard to acquire

They learn to unlearn

To redeem the fault of the people

To assist the nature of all things

Without daring to meddle

It is relatively easy to maintain the situation when everything is peaceful and quiet. When the possibility for chaos is small or nearly non-existent, it is a simple task to keep it in check.

Generally speaking, it is always easier to act on something effectively when it is small. Take care of an issue as early as possible, before it really becomes an issue. Nip a potential problem in the bud so it doesn't get the chance to grow into something serious.

This same principle extends to many aspects of life. The mightiest trees started as a small and delicate shoot, barely noticeable in the ground. The tallest building we have had to be built from the ground up. There was a time when it was nothing more than a pile of dirt brought to the site in preparation for construction to begin.

The greatest, most epic journey one can undertake still must begin where you stand. Similarly, great deeds can have a small, indeed humble, beginning. A vast accumulation of knowledge starts somewhere, with the turning of one page in a particular book. When we keep this great wisdom in mind, it becomes easier for us to overcome inertia and take that first step.

Notes

The ancient Chinese measurement of distance, li, is loosely translated as "mile." One li is about half a kilometer, and roughly a third of a mile.

Many people know the expression, "A journey of a thousand miles begins with one step." However, most of them probably have no idea that it originally came from this chapter of the Tao Te Ching. Some are aware that it's Chinese in origin, but mistaken it attribute it to Confucius. So now you know something they do not.

Another interesting thing to note is that the popular expression is in fact a mistranslation. The original contains no character for "one" or "step." Nor does it imply the taking of that first step. What it says is that the little piece of ground beneath your feet is the starting point of even the longest journeys. That's all it says. The taking of that first step is certainly a legitimate interpretation and amplification of this passage, but it definitely does not qualify as a translation.

CONSIDER THE INSIGNIFICANT

That which is at rest is easily restrained, that which has not yet appeared is easily prevented. The weak is easily broken, the scanty is easily scattered. Consider a difficulty before it arises, and administer affairs before they become disorganized. A tree that it takes both arms to encircle grew from a tiny rootlet. A pagoda of nine stories was erected by placing small bricks. A journey of three thousand miles begins with one step. If one tries to improve a thing, he mars it; if he seizes it, he loses it. The wise man, therefore, not attempting to form things does not mar them, and not grasping after things he does not lose them. The people in their rush for business are ever approaching success but continually failing. One must be as careful to the end as at the beginning if he is to succeed.

Therefore the wise man desires to be free from desire, he does not value the things that are difficult of attainment. He learns to be unlearned, he returns to that which all others ignore. In that spirit he helps all things toward their natural development, but dares not interfere.

What is at equilibrium is easy (i) to maintain;

What has not emerged is easy (i) to plan (mou);

What is fragile is easy (i) to dissolve;

What is minute is easy (i) to disperse.

Act (wei) when there is yet nothing to do.

Govern (chih) when there is yet no disorder (luan).

A tree whose trunk is of a man's embrace,

Begins from something extremely tiny.

A tower of nine stories high,

Is built from a heap of earth.

A trip of a thousand miles,

Begins right at one's feet.

He who acts (wei) fails,

He who holds on to loses.

Therefore the sage does not act (wei) so he does not fail,

He does not hold on to, so he does not lose.

The people in launching their projects,

Often fail when these are near completion.

Had they been as careful at the end as at the beginning,

There would have been no failures.

Therefore the sage desires not to desire,

He does not treasure hard-to-get goods;

Learns not to learn,

He recovers the transgressions (kuo) of many.

In assisting the self-becoming (tzu-jan) of all beings,

He dares not act (wei).

What is not moving is easily held. What has not happened is easily planned. What is brittle is easily broken. What is tiny is easily dispersed. Deal with a problem before it arises; exercise control before confusion exists.

A tree with an arm-girth of trunk grows from a tiny spout; a nine-stoied terrace arises from a heap of dirt; a thousand-mile journey begins with the first step.

Action spoils; reaching loses. The truly wise are not active. Thus they do not spoil things. Do not reach so do not lose. Things are often spoiled very close to completion.

Be as careful at completion as you were at the beginning.

Thus the truly wise want the unwanted and do not prize what is rare. Study what is unstudied and preserve what is lost. Assist in the course of nature but never interfere in it.

That which is lying still is easy to pick up.

That which has not yet happened is easy to prevent.

That which is brittle is easily shattered.

That which is small is easily scattered.

Deal with things before they become problems.

Straighten things out before they become confused.

A huge tree begins as a tiny sprout.

A terrace nine storeys high begins as a small pile of dirt.

The giant pine tree grows from a tiny sprout.

A thousand–mile journey begins with a single step.

Intrude and ruin.

Grasp and lose.

Therefore, the Tao–Master practices non–ado and so does not ruin;

he is not grasping and so does not lose.

People often fail just when they are about to succeed.

Be as careful at the end as you are at the beginning,

and you will not fail.

Therefore, the Tao–Master desires no–desire,

treasures no treasures, studies no studies.

He pays attention to what others have ignored.

He helps all things find their center,

all without ado.

Sixty-four

Peace is easily maintained;

Trouble is easily overcome before it starts.

The brittle is easily shattered;

The small is easily scattered.

Deal with it before it happens.

Set things in order before there is confusion.

A
tree as great as a man's embrace springs up from a small shoot;

A terrace nine stories high begins with a pile of earth;

A journey of a thousand miles starts under one's feet.

He
who acts defeats his own purpose;

He who grasps loses.

The sage does not act, and so is not defeated.

He does not grasp and therefore does not lose.

People
usually fail when they are on the verge of success.

So give as much care to the end as to the beginning;

Then there will be no failure.

Therefore
the sage seeks freedom from desire.

He does not collect precious things.

He learns not to hold on to ideas.

He brings men back to what they have lost.

He help the ten thousand things find their own nature,

But refrains from action.

A stable situation is easy to be maintained;

A condition without the sign of apparent change is easy to be coped with;

A fragile thing is easy to break;

A minute thing is easy to dissolve.

The proper treatment should be given to what has happened;

Keep things in order before disorder sets in.

A huge tree grows from a tiny seedling;

A nine-storey terrace rises from a mound of earth;

A journey of a thousand li starts from beneath one's feet.

Those who wants to obtain it by force will ruin it;

Those who hold it by force will lose it.

Thus the sage never ruins anything,

Because of his inaction;

He never loses anything.

In doing things,

People often fail on the verge of success.

If they are as prudent at the end as at the beginning,

They will never fail.

That is why the sage

Desires what others do not desire,

Values not rare goods,

Learns to lack learning,

Makes up for people's faults.

In this way he helps all things develop naturally

And refrains from interfering in them.

What is at rest is easy to hold;

What has not yet shown its sign is easy to prepare for.

What is tender is easy to break up;

What is minute is easy to scatter.

Deal with things before they become reality;

Put things in order before disorder arises.

A tree as big as a man's embrace

Grows from the tip of a fine hair.

A terrace nine stories high

Rises from a heap of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles

Starts from where one stands.

Whoever acts on it will ruin it;

Whoever lays hold of it will lose it.

For this reason the sage

Does nothing and therefore ruins nothing;

Lays hold of nothing and therefore loses nothing.

People, in handling their affairs,

Always ruin their work on the verge of completion.

Be careful at the end as at the start,

And you will never fail.

For this reason the sage

Desires not to desire,

Does not treasure rare goods,

Learns not to learn.

He returns to what the multitude passes by.

He thus helps the ten thousand things to be so of themselves [tzu jan],

And does not try to rule.

It is easier to maintain the status quo when things are established and stabilised.

It is easier to correct things when the incipient signs of trouble have just occurred.

Fragile things disintegrate quickly.

Minute things disperse readily.

You should act well before the rot has set in.

You should take effective measures before chaos arises.

A tree broader than a man's embrace grows from a tiny seedling.

The tallest tower starts from a clod of earth.

The longest journey begins with the first step.

He who schemes will fail, and he who grasps tightly will lose it.

Hence, the sage does not scheme and will not fail.

He does not hold fast so he will not lose it.

Failure usually occurs at the cusp of succeeding.

If you pay careful attention from start to finish, there will be few failures.

What the sage wants is the opposite of what others want.

Hence, the sage does not covet rare objects.

The sage learns what others don't want to learn.

Thus, he avoids making mistakes that others commonly make.

The sage only facilitates.

He lets things evolve, but he does not interfere.

Attend to the Insignificant

Shou Wei

What is secure can be easily maintained.

What is yet unmanifest can be easily tackled.

What is brittle can be easily broken.

What is puny can be easily scattered.

Act before any trouble starts.

Enforce order before disorder arises.

A big tree, whose girth fills a man's embrace,

Springs from a tender shoot.

A terrace nine stories in height

Rises from a heap of earth.

A journey one thousand miles long

Begins with the first step.

He who interferes will fail;

He who grasps will lose.

Therefore, the Sage does not interfere,

And incurs no failure;

He does not grasp,

And suffers no loss.

People in handling their affairs

Often fail when within an ace of fulfilment.

Be circumspect at the end as at the beginning,

And there will be no failure.

Therefore the Sage desires what is not desired (by others),

And does not treasure hard-to-get objects.

He learns what is not learned (by others),

And restores what the multitude has skipped.

He assists the natural trend of all things,

But dares not venture to tamper with it.

That which is motionless can be easily held;

That which has not been forecast can be easily planned;

Hat which is still tender can be easily broken;

That which is minute can be easily scattered.

Take things in hand before they come into existence;

Put things in order before they are in a state of confusion.

The tree which fills your arms' embrace brew from a tine shoot;

The nine-storey tower arose from a heap of earth.

The journey of a thousand miles began with the spot of earth covered by one's own feet.

He who acts, spoils. He who grasps, loses.

The Sage does ot act: therefore he does not spoil things.

He does no grasp; therefore he does not lose things.

But ordinary people, eagerly going about their business,

Often fail when the are on the verge of succeeding.

Keep watch on the end as well as on the beginning;

Then you will not fail.

Therefore the Sage:

Desires only the undesiring;

He does not value things that are hard to come by.

He learns how not to learn,

Turning back to those things which others have passed through,

And thus helps all creatures to fulfil their own natures.

But he does not venture to act.

What is at rest is easy to hold.

What hasn't happened is easy to forestall.

What is brittle is easy to break.

What is minute is easy to scatter.

Deal with a thing before it exists;

Handle disorder before it occurs.

A tree of a full span's girth

Springs from a tiny sprout

A nine-storey tower

Rises from a clod of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles

Starts from where your feet are.

Whoever acts spoils,

Whoever grasps loses.

The sage does nothing;

Therefore he spoils nothing.

He grasps nothing;

Therefore he loses nothing.

People often spoil things at the point of success:

Take it easy at the finish as well as the start;

Then nothing will be spoiled

Therefore the sage

Desires to be desireless,

Does not prize rare goods,

Learns to unlearn his learning,

Returns the people to what they have lost,

Helps all things find their nature,

But dares not do.

Tackle difficulties when they are easy.

Accomplish great things when they are small.

Handle what is going to be rough when it is still smooth.

Control what has not yet formed its force.

Deal with a dangerous situation while it is safe.

Manage what is hard while it is soft.

Eliminate what is vicious before it becomes destructive.

This is called "attending to great things at small beginnings."

A tree so big it can fill the span of a man's arms grows from a tiny sprout.

A terrace nine stories high rises from a shovelful of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.

Thus, one of integral virtue never sets about grandiose things,

yet he is able to achieve great things.

Lightly made promises inspire little confidence.

Making light of things at the beginning,

one will meet with failure in the end.

Being prepared for hardship, one will not be overcome by it.

In handling their affairs, people often ruin them just as they are on the verge of success.

With heedfulness in the beginning and all the way through to the end,

nothing is ruined.

LXIV.

Guarding
the Small

That
which is at rest is easy to be kept hold of,

And
what has made no sign, and is yet concealed from all,

Is
easy to be taken care of then by proper measures,

Break it while it is feeble, scatter it while
it is small.

Act
before it exists, regulate before disorder,

The mighty
tree that fills the arms has grown from a tiny sprout,

From
a little mound of earth was raised the tower of nine stories,

And
the journey of a thousand miles began with the first step out.

He
that makes mars, he that grasps loses;

The
sage will neither make, nor mar, nor grasp, and cannot lose,

But
people fail in business, on the verge of its succeeding,

By
losing at the end the care they first began to use.

And
so the sage does not desire the things desired by others,

He
does not prize the treasures that are difficult to obtain,

He
learns what others do not learn, he turns back to their leavings,

And
helps spontaneous nature, but dares not to constrain.

His Restfulness is easily maintained.

Events foreseen by him are easily arranged for.

By him weak things are easily bent,

And small things are easily scattered.

He can stop an evil before it comes into existence.

He can keep a twig straight before it becomes crooked.

Behold the girth of this tree!

It grew from a small filament of a stalk.

This tower of nine stories has its base upon a small space on the earth.

The journey of a thousand miles began with a footstep on the ground.

He who makes, unmakes.

He who grasps, lets go.

That is why the self-controlled man by Inner Life can make and by Inner life unmake, by Inner Life can grasp and by Inner Life let go.

Men in business affairs come near perfection, then fail.

If they were as attentive at the end as at the beginning their business would succeed.

That is why the self-controlled man desires to have no wishes; he sets no value upon rare objects; he learns without study; he helps all beings by the outflow of his personality; and he does this without planning to do it.

What is not moving is easy to hold.

What shows no predictions is easily made not to happen.

What is delicate is easily smashed.

What is small is easily widely separated and lost.

Do things before they have become visible. ( Plan ahead.)

Help peace and order before confusion and disorder have set in. ( Punish

the destructive without delay.)

A tree as big as a man's embrace starts from a tiny sprout. (Big things

start small.)

A tower nine stories high begins with a heap of earth.

A journey of three thousand miles starts from where your feet stand.

They who trouble over anything spoils it.

They who hold anything loses it.

The Complete Thinker troubles over nothing and then spoils nothing.

Tries to hold nothing and then loses nothing.

In handling business, people often spoil it just at the point of success.

With carefulness in the beginning and

patience at the end,

nothing will be spoiled.

The Complete Thinker

wants to be want-less.

Sets no value on rare goods.

Learns to relearn learning.

And convinces the people to return from where they have passed.

They only helps all creatures to find their own nature,

but does not try to lead them by the nose.

What is at rest is easy to hold.

What is not yet manifested is easy to forestall.

What is brittle is easy to melt.

What is minute is easy to disperse.

Act before a thing is there; create order before there is disorder.

A tree of an arm's span has grown from a tiny fibre.

A tower nine storeys high was raised from a heap of earth.

A journey of a thousand leagues started with what was under a footsole.

In promoting their affairs men often spoil them when they are about to succeed.

Heed the end as much as the beginning, then no affairs will be spoiled.

Therefore the Saint desires not to desire and does not prize goods that are difficult to obtain. He learns not to learn and reverts to what all men pass by.

Thus he sustains the natural course of the ten thousand thing, but he dares not act.

That which is at rest is easily kept hold of; before a thing

has given indications of its presence, it is easy to take measures

against it; that which is brittle is easily broken; that which is very

small is easily dispersed. Action should be taken before a thing has

made its appearance; order should be secured before disorder has

begun.

The
tree which fills the arms grew from the tiniest sprout; the

tower of nine storeys rose from a (small) heap of earth; the journey

of a thousand li commenced with a single step.

He
who acts (with an ulterior purpose) does harm; he who takes hold

of a thing (in the same way) loses his hold. The sage does not act

(so), and therefore does no harm; he does not lay hold (so), and

therefore does not lose his bold. (But) people in their conduct of

affairs are constantly ruining them when they are on the eve of

success. If they were careful at the end, as (they should be) at the

beginning, they would not so ruin them.

Therefore
the sage desires what (other men) do not desire, and does

not prize things difficult to get; he learns what (other men) do not

learn, and turns back to what the multitude of men have passed by.

Thus he helps the natural development of all things, and does not dare

to act (with an ulterior purpose of his own).

What is secure is easily grasped;
what has no omens is easily forestalled;

what is brittle is easily split;
what is diffuse is easily dispersed.

Act
before need arises;
Bring order before disorder begins.
A
tree you could barely wrap your arms around
began as a downy shoot;

A terrace nine layers tall
began with a single basketful of earth;
An
ascent of a hundred steps
begins beneath one's foot.
Who
'acts' fails.
Who grasps-on loses.
Sages do not 'act'
therefore
they do not fail;
they do not grasp-on
and therefore they do not lose.

In
pursuing their affairs,
people often fail when close to success.
Therefore,
if one is cautious at both end and beginning,
there will be no failures.

Thus
Sages desire to be free of avarice,
and do not prize goods that are hard
to come by.
They learn not to be 'learned'
and return to what others
leave behind.
Thus
they can help the myriad creatures to be natural,
for they dare not 'act!'

To
keep the peace is easy

Begin before a problem stirs

Handle things before they happen

And trouble before it occurs

Be
calm and conquer worries

Before they can proceed

The very largest tree begins

As just a tiny seed

It
takes a single step to start

A journey of a thousand miles

And just one brick to start to build

The grandest domiciles

Let
things happen as they will

You do not need to interfere

See that you do nothing

That causes discord to appear

WHAT is at rest is easy to hold.

What manifests no omens is easily forestalled.

What is fragile is easily shattered.

What is small is easily scattered.

Tackle things before they have appeared.

Cultivate peace and order before confusion and disorder have set in.

A tree as big as a man's embrace springs from a tiny sprout.

A tower nine stories high begins with a heap of earth.

A journey of a thousand leagues starts from where your feet stand.

He who fusses over anything spoils it.

He who grasps anything loses it.

The Sage fusses over nothing and therefore spoils nothing.

He grips at nothing and therefore loses nothing.

In handling affairs, people often spoil them just at the point of success.

With heedfulness in the beginning and patience at the end, nothing will be spoiled.

Therefore, the Sage desires to be desireless,

Sets no value on rare goods,

Learns to unlearn his learning,

And induces the masses to return from where they have overpassed.

He only helps all creatures to find their own nature,

But does not venture to lead them by the nose.

Peace and tranquility are easy to hold onto and keep.

It is best to deal with matters before they present themselves.

What is brittle shatters easily.

What is small is easy to disperse.

Deal with troubles before they have arisen.

Establish order before disorder has reared itself.

A large tree grows from a small twig.

A terrace nine levels high starts with a clod of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.

If you rush into action heedlessly you will rush into your own failure.

If you try to grasp things you will lose your grip.

Therefore the sage does not try to rush to completion, and he does not grasp all about for things.

In this way he avoids failure and losing.

Often people fail in their endeavors on the verge of completion,

this is because they exercise care at the beginning, and then slacken near the end.

Take as full care of tasks at the end as at the beginning, this will ensure proper completion.

Therefore the sage desires nothing so much as to be free from desire.

He does not treasure things that are difficult to procure.

He learns to not know.

He practices a return to the natural origin of all things without a practice to that end.

Things are easier to control while things are quiet.

Things are easier to plan far in advance.

Things break easier while they are still brittle.

Things are easier hid while they are still small.

Prevent
problems before they arise.

Take action before things get out of hand.

The tallest tree

begins as a tiny sprout.

The tallest building

starts with one shovel of dirt.

A journey of a thousand miles

starts with a single footstep.

If
you rush into action, you will fail.

If you hold on too tight, you will lose your grip.

Therefore
the Master lets things take their course

and thus never fails.

She doesn't hold on to things

and never loses them.

By pursing your goals too relentlessly,

you let them slip away.

If you are as concerned about the outcome

as you are about the beginning,

then it is hard to do things wrong.

The master seeks no possessions.

She learns by unlearning,

thus she is able to understand all things.

This gives her the ability to help all of creation.

Learn to recognize beginnings. At birth, event are relatively easy to manage. Slight interventions shape and guide easily. Potential difficulties can be avoided. The greatest danger lies in disrupting the emerging process by using too much force.

The wise leader sees things almost before they happen. A tree that is stiff and rigid begins as a pliant sapling. A great construction project begins with one shovelful of earth. A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.

Once an event is fully energized and formed, stand back as much as possible. Needless interventions will only confuse or block what is happening. Especially, do not try to make an event conform to any predetermined plan or model.

Many leaders spoil the work just as it nears completion. They get eager. They get interested in certain outcomes. They become anxious and make mistakes. This is a time for care and consciousness. Don't do too much. Don't be too helpful. Don't worry about getting credit for having done something.

Because the wise leader has no expectations, no outcome can be called a failure. Paying attention, allowing a natural unfolding, and standing back most of the time, the leader sees the event arrive at a satisfactory conclusion.

What is at rest is easy to maintain.

What has not yet happened is easy to plan.

That which is fragile is easily shattered

That which is tiny is easily scattered.

Correct problems before they occur.

Intervene before chaos erupts.

A tree too big around to hug is produced from a tiny sprout.

A nine-story tower begins with a mound of dirt.

A thousand-mile journey begins with your own two feet.

Whoever tries will fail.

Whoever clutches, loses.

Therefore the Sage, not trying, cannot fail

Not clutching, she cannot lose.

When people try,

They usually fail just on the brink of success.

If one is as cautious at the outset as at the end,

One cannot fail.

Therefore the Sage desires nothing so much

as to be desireless.

She does not value rare and expensive goods.

She unlearns what she was once taught

And helps the people regain what they have lost;

To help every being assume its natura way of being,

And not dare to force anything.

Peace
and harmony are easy to perpetuate.

Situations are easy to deal with before

they manifest.

The brittle is easily cracked.

The small is easy to broadcast.

Flow
in peace and harmony and problems do

not manifest.

Focus on the oneness of all things

and avoid confusion.

The
greatest tree manifests from an

unremarkable shoot.

A multilevel building begins with

the laying of a single brick.

A journey of a thousand miles begins

with a single step.

He
who attempts to control his life becomes

confused.

Attempt to grasp a thing and it disappears.

The sage flows in peace and harmony

and so is not confused.

She attaches herself to nothing and

consequently her vision remains clear.

Confused
people usually quit just short of

success.

Therefore, see experiences as

the oneness of life from beginning to end

and it will be impossible to fail.

The
sage is indifferent to desire:

she does not accumulate possessions,

she is unemotional regarding ideas,

she focuses people on their oneness,

she, by example, illuminates

the path to peace and harmony

but does not impose her will

or foist her views on

others.

What is calm is easy to manage.

What has not yet spread is easy to contain.

What is brittle is easy to break.

What is small is easy to scatter.

Control it before it happens.

Contain it before it spreads.

A great tree comes from fine pollen.

A multi-level terrace rises from repeated layers.

A thousand mile journey begins with a footstep.

To act is to fail.

To keep is to lose.

Thus does the wise man not act,

and therefore not fail;

not keep, and therefore not lose.

People look for trouble, and often fail on the brink of success.

Care in the end, as at the beginning, ensures success.

Is this not what the wise man wants,

rather than expensive, difficult to obtain goods ?

Know without Learning, to restore people to the way they were.

Help all things to correct themselves, but do not presume to act.

Things which keep still are easy to hold.

Events yet to happen are easy to plan.

Things that are fragile are easy to break.

Things that are small are easy to lose.

Deal with things before they happen.

Put things in order before chaos sets in.

A tree as big as a man's embrace grows from a tiny shoot;

A nine-storey terrace begins as a mound of earth;

A journey of a thousand miles starts with the first step.

Those who take action, fail.

Those who grasp for things, lose them.

Therefore the Sage takes no action, yet never fails;

He grasps for nothing, yet never loses.

In managing their affairs people often fail at the point of success.

So attend carefully to the end as much as to the beginning,

And there will be no failure.

Therefore the Sage desires to be free from desire.

He does not prize rare treasures.

He learns to unlearn his learning,

And he brings the people back to what they have lost.1

Thus he furthers the natural completion of the Ten Thousand Things,

And refrains from acting.

1. i.e., the Tao

What is still is easy to keep.

What has not developed is easy to guide.

What is fragile is easy to break.

What is little is easy to scatter.

One starts a project before things develop otherwise.

One prevents tumults before they happen otherwise.

A huge tree starts from a small sprout.

A nine-story tower starts from the first shovel full of dirt.

A long journey starts from the spot under the feet.

One who willfully starts a cause will ruin it.

One who willfully ends a cause will lose it.

The wise person does nothing willfully

And will therefore neither ruin nor lose.

People often fail when they are about to succeed.

If one is careful from start to end, one will not fail.

The wise ruler therefore desires what none would desire,

Values what none would value, learns what none can learn,

Remembers the useful experiences and lessons of all,

And does nothing willfully so as to help cultivate the natural.

When sitting still, they are easy to hold down no omens yet, it is easy to plan when fragile, they are easy to break when small, they are easy to scatter.

Work on it when it isn't yet put it in order when it is not yet disordered.

A tree you can barely get your arms around, grows from a tiny shoot a nine-story tower begins as a heap of earth a thousand-mile journey begins under your feet.

Working ruins, grasping loses. And so the Wise Person: Does not work, so does not ruin does not grasp, so does not lose.

Men often ruin their affairs on the eve of success, because they are not as prudent at the end as in the beginning. The wise man wills what others do not will, and values not things rare. He learns what others learn not, and gathers up what they despise.

And so the Wise Person: Desires to be desireless does not prize goods hard to come by learns to be un-leaned turns back to the place all others have gone on from. So as to help along the naturalness of the thousands of things with out presuming to be a Worker.

It is easy to help him who mastered harmony.

It is easy to show the way to a seeker who has not found it yet. However, one has to remember that a week person can easily fall out of the path. He who is a weak soul yet will run away from difficulties.

It is better to begin constructing there where one does not have to destroy old walls. It is better to introduce spiritual knowledge there where one is not attacked by angry and fool people.

And then — a great tree grows of a small sapling; a nine-story tower begins to be constructed of a handful of earth; a journey of thousand li begins with one step.

In the world of matter, entrepreneurs go bankrupt; the owners of property lose it. This is why the wise does not act like this — and he does not suffer failures. He possesses nothing — and thus has nothing to lose.

The wise does not live in worldly passions; he does not strive to gain something material that requires much effort. He lives in natural simplicity and is satisfied with that which was refused by other people.

He walks the Path to Tao.

Troubles can be avoided even before arising.

When harmony is maintained beforehand,

Confusion is not able to surface.

By
closing the door, the entry is not possible,

A big tree was in its beginning a tiny offshoot,

Thus a great expedition starts with a little step.

The
Wise Person is not looking to gain anything,

He does not want glory or reputation.

Thus he cannot loose anything.

This is his living proof of achievements without efforts.

It
is easy to maintain control of things while they are still quiescent. It is
easy to plan for them before they have given any inkling. When things are crisp,
they are easy to shear off. When things are minute, they are easily dispersed.
Do it before they come into existence! Regulate them before they become disordered!
A tree of two spans starts as the finest filament. A tower of nine stories begins
by heaping up dirt. A journey of a thousand miles begins beneath one's feet.
Those who do things defeat [their goals]. Those who clutch at things lose them.
For that reason the Sage has no activity and so suffers no defeats. He clutches
at nothing and so loses nothing. In pursuing their objectives the people constantly
fail when they are about to succeed. If you are as careful of conclusions as
you are of beginnings, then you will not ruin things. For that reason the Sage
desires not to desire, and does not value scarce commodities. He learns non-learning,
in order to return to what the multitudes have passed by, and thereby can aid
in the natural processes of the myriad creatures without daring to act forcefully.

Things at rest are easy to hold.

Things unbegun are easy to plan.

Fragile things are easy to shatter.

Tiny things are easy to scatter.

Manage things before they exist.

Set things in order before they become chaotic.

A tree as big as one's embrace originates from a rootlet.

A nine-story terrace begins with a heap of earth.

A thousand-li journey starts from beneath one's feet.

To act means to fail;

To insist means to lose.

The Sage does not act and therefore never fails;

He does not insist and therefore never loses.

When the people undertake to do something,

They almost always fail at the point of success.

One should be cautious at the end as at the beginning,

Then there will be no failure.

Therefore the Sage desires no desires,

Values not the rare treasures,

Learns from the unlearned,

Reverses the faults of the people,

And assists all things in their natural development,

Never daring to interfere.

The Power at the Beginning

What is at rest is easy to hold;

What is not yet begun is easy to plan.

What is thin is easy to melt;

What is minute is easy to disperse.

Deal with things before they emerge;

Put them in order before there is disorder.

A tree of many arm spans is produced from a tiny sprout.

A tower of nine stories is raised from a pile of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begin with a footstep.

Those who act on things, spoil them;

Those who seize things, lose them.

Thus Evolved Individuals do nothing;

Hence they spoil nothing.

They seize nothing;

Hence they lose nothing.

People often spoil their work at the point of its completion.

With care at the end as well as the beginning,

No work will be spoiled.

Thus Evolved Individuals desire to be desireless

And do not treasure goods that are hard to get.

They learn without learning,

By returning to the place where the Collective Mind passes.

In this way they assist All Things naturally

Without venturing to act.

You have heard that the journey of a thousand miles begins with one step and that the mightiest tree was once a seed. Do not dream of the future. Be calm, take a breath and live now. In the end, it will be a job well done, and you can rest. Do not desire; and forget something each day. Soon, all will be of the Dao.

A thing that is still is easy to hold.

Given no omen, it is easy to plan.

Soft things are easy to melt.

Small particles scatter easily.

The time to take care is before it is done.

Establish order before confusion sets in.

Tree trunks around which you can reach with

your
arms were at first only minuscule sprouts.

A nine-storied terrace began with a clod.

A thousand-mile journey began with a foot put down.

Doing
spoils it, grabbing misses it;

So the Wise Man refrains from doing

and
doesn't spoil anything;

He grabs at nothing so never misses.

People
are constantly spoiling a project

when it lacks only a step to completion.

To avoid making a mess of it,

be as careful of the end as you were of the beginning.

So the Wise Man wants the unwanted;

he sets no high value on anything

because it is hard to get.

He studies what others neglect

and restores to the world what multitudes have passed by.

His object is to restore everything to its natural course,

but he dares take no steps to that end.

The stability of things is easy to hold while they are stable;

Things are easy to deal with while they show no sign of change;

Things are easily broken while they are still fragile;

Things are easily dispersed while they are minute.

Deal with things before they have happened,

And get things in order before their disorder begins.

A huge tree which fills one's arms grows from a tiny seedling;

A high terrace which has nine storeys rises from a small heap of earth;

A journey of a thousand li begins with the first step.

He who takes action messes things up;

And he who holds things fast loses them.

Therefore, the sage does not fail in anything since he does nothing;

Does not lose anything since he holds nothing.

People often fail when they are about to succeed in their business.

If they are as careful at the end as at the beginning,

They would not ruin their business.

Therefore the sage's desire is to have no desire,

And he doesn't value rare goods.

(The Sage's) learning is to learn nothing, in order to remedy the fault that people often have.

Thus he helps the natural development of all things, and does not dare to act constrainedly.

The secure is easy to maintain; the premanifest [weizhao] is easy to plan for.

The fragile is easy to melt; the tiny is easy to dissolve.

So take action while it still does not exist

And control it before it turns into disorder.

A tree that takes both arms to clasp grows from a tiny shoot;

a nine-story terrace starts from a pile of dirt;

a journey of a thousand li begins under one's feet.

One who takes deliberate action [wei] will become ruined;

one who consciously administers will become lost.

This is why the sage engages in no deliberate action and so never becomes ruined, does not consciously administer and so never becomes lost.

People pursue matters in such a way that they always suffer ruin just when they are about to succeed.

If one is as mindful of ends as he is of beginnings, his endeavors will never end in defeat.

This is why the sage desires to have no desire and does not value goods hard to get.

He learns not to learn and redeems the errors that the mass of common folk make.

Accordingly, he enhances the natural state of the myriad folk but dares not engage in deliberate action.

1. What is at rest is easy to hold;

2. What has not yet given a sign is easy to plan for;

3. The brittle is easily shattered;

4. The minute is easily scattered;

5. Act on it before it comes into being;

6. Order it before it turns into chaos.

7.
A tree [so big] that it takes both arms to surround starts out as the tiniest
shoot;

8. A nine-story terrace rises up from a basket of dirt.

9. A high place one hundred, one thousand feet high begins from under your feet.

10.
Those who act on it ruin it;

11. Those who hold on to it lose it.

12. Therefore the Sage does not act,

13. And as a result, he doesn't ruin [things];

14. He does not hold on to [things],

15. And as a result, he doesn't lose [things];

16. In people's handling of affairs, they always ruin things when they're right
at the point of completion.

17. Therefore we say, "If you're as careful at the end as you were at the beginning,
you'll have no failures."

18. Therefore the Sage desires not to desire and doesn't value goods that are
hard to obtain;

19. He learns not to learn and returns to what the masses pass by;

20. He could help all things to be natural, yet he dare not do it.

It's easy to
maintain balance.

Trouble can be nipped in the bud.

Fragile things break easily,

and small things are easy to lose.

Deal with the
situation

before it becomes a problem.

Keep everything straight

so it can't get messed up.

Every tree was
once a seed.

Every skyscraper started out

with a shovelful of dirt.

And--stop me if you've heard this one before--

a journey of a thousand miles

begins with a single step.

When you try
too hard,

you defeat your own purpose.

Cling to stuff,

and you will suffer loss.

The Masters make no effort,

so they never fail.

They aren't attached to things,

so they never feel loss.

People often
screw up

when the job's nearly done.

Pay as much attention

to the finishing touches

as you do to the initial steps,

and you won't screw up like that.

The Masters
try to be free from desire.

They don't collect precious things.

They don't cling to any beliefs.

They pay attention

to what everybody else ignores.

They help the world get right with Tao,

but don't try to change a thing.

.

Do Not Grab

What stays still is easy to hold.

Without omens it is easy to plan.

The brittle is easy to shatter.

The minute is easy to scatter.

Handle things before they appear.

Organize things before there is confusion.

A tree as big as a person's embrace grows from a tiny shoot.

A tower nine stories high begins with a mound of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins under one's feet.

To act is to fail.

To grab is to lose.

Therefore the wise do not act and do not fail.

They do not grab and do not lose.

In handling things people usually fail

when they are about to succeed.

Be as careful at the end as at the beginning,

and there will be no failure.

Therefore the wise desire to have no desires.

They do not value rare treasures.

They learn what is unknown,

returning to what many have missed

so that all things may be natural without interference.

Easy it is to guide what is still at rest to forestall what is not yet manifest to bend what is still weak to master what is still small. Therefore, put order into things in their not-yet-being.

Guide in the bud what will later be awkward and unmanageable.

The strongest tree grows from a tiny rootlet the highest house rises from a clod of earth a journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step.

Interfering disturbs and spoils grasping causes disappearance and loss.

Therefore the Sage:

Not grasping he does not disturb and spoil.

Not interfering he does not lose.

The masses instead busily greedily interfering grasping for plenitude are at an end before completion ...

... They would not fail before the goal if they took care of the beginning as of the end of the small as of the great!

Follow the Sage:

Content with little he does not fail.

Heeding what is unheeded letting things ripen and biding his time he follows the wisdom of non-action and attains what belongs to him.

Beginning And Ending

Lao Tze says,

That which remains still is easy to hold;

that which has not yet given indication of its presence is easy to measure against;

that which is brittle is easily broken;

and that which is minute is easily dispersed.

Deal with a thing before its disorder has made its appearance, and govern an affair before its confusion has begun.

A tree which fills the arms grows from a tiny sprout;

a tower of nine floors rises from a heap of earth;

a journey of a thousand li begins at one's feet.

He who acts with an intent to control fate does harm;

he who takes hold of a thing in the same way loses his hold.

The sage works without an intent to control fate, and therefore does no harm.

He does not lay hold so, and therefore does not lose his hold.

People who conduct their affairs often ruin them on the eve of their success.

If they are careful at the end, as they were careful at the beginning;

then there would be no ruined affairs.

Therefore, the sage desires what other men do not desire, and does not value objects which are difficult to obtain.

He learns what other men do not learn, and turns back to what the multitude of men have passed by.

Thus he assists all existence to develop in a natural course, and does not dare to act with an intent to control fate.

STAYING WITH THE MYSTERY

If
problems are accepted,

and dealt with before they arise,

they might even be prevented before confusion begins,

In this way peace may be maintained.

The
brittle is easily shattered,

and the small is easily scattered.

Great trees grow from the smallest shoots;

a terraced garden, from a pile of earth,

and a journey of a thousand miles

begins by taking the initial step.

He
who contrives, defeats his purpose;

and he who is grasping, loses.

The sage does not contrive to win,

and therefore is not defeated;

he is not grasping, so does not lose.

It
is easy to fail when nearing completion,

therefore, take care right to the end,

not only in the beginning.

The
sage seeks freedom from desire,

not grasping at ideas.

He brings men back when they are lost,

and helps them find the Tao.

What is rooted is easy to nourish.

What is recent is easy to correct.

What is brittle is easy to break.

What is small is easy to scatter.

Prevent trouble before it arises.

Put things in order before they exist.

The giant pine tree

grows from a tiny sprout.

The journey of a thousand miles

starts from beneath your feet.

Rushing into action, you fail.

Trying to grasp things, you lose them.

Forcing a project to completion,

you ruin what was almost ripe.

Therefore the Master takes action

by letting things take their course.

He remains as calm

at the end as at the beginning.

He has nothing,

thus has nothing to lose.

What he desires is non-desire;

what he learns is to unlearn.

He simply reminds people

of who they have always been.

He cares about nothing but the Tao.

Thus he can care for all things.

What is still at rest is easy to maintain.

What is still insignificant is easy to dispose of.

What is still fragile is easily shattered.

What is still not yet begun is easy to plan.

Action should be taken before the emergency occurs.

Measures should be taken before confusion is formed.

A large tree, so large arms can hardly go around, was grown from a tiny seed.

A tall tower, of nine stories height, was built first with a handful of dirt.

A long journey of a thousand miles can be finished by moving feet.

One who intervenes will be defeated.

One who grasps the world will lose it.

So the Sage ruler does not intervene, thus he does not fail.

He does not grasp, thus he never loses.

Sometimes people fail to reach the end when they are already on the verge of success.

A Sage was as cautious at the end as in the beginning, so he could avoid failure.

Thus a Sage ruler never desired what should not be desired, such as he never cherished rare goods.

He did not experience what should not be experienced, such as he never repeated the faults of others.

It gives supplementary help to the nature of All Things, and yet it dares not to assert itself.

It is easy to sustain what is at rest.

It is easy to plan for that of which there is not even a sign.

What is fragile is easily broken.

What is minute is easily dispersed.

Act upon it before it exists.

Regulate it before it becomes chaos.

A massive tree grows from a little sprout.

A nine-story-building rises from a clod of earth.

A thousand fathoms begin with a single step.

Those who impose action upon it will fail.

Those who cling to it lose it.

So the sage, through nonaction, does not fail.

Not clinging, he does not lose.

The common people's engagement in affairs fails prior to success.

So the saying goes,

"Give as much careful attention to the end as to the beginning, then the affairs will not fail."

It is on that account that the sage desires not to desire and does not value goods that are hard to get.

He learns not to learn and restores the common people's losses.

He is able to support the nature of all things and, not by daring, to impose action.

LXIV

What
is quiet is easy to contain

What has not yet committed itself is easy to divert

The soft is easily melted, the small easily dispersed

The
moral: Don't wait till problems mature before you act on them

The
greatest chaos was once orderly

The tallest tree was once a hidden seed

The tallest tower a pile of dirt

The longest journey, but one step, then another

Those
who act, ruin; those who cling, lose

Things always seem to fall apart just at completion

Because you think they're done, and act carelessly

So the taoist never acts, never clings, never tries to complete

He is as aware at the end as at the beginning

Though
she could bring all things into perfect harmony

She doesn't, because she knows what's enough

Wbat Is at Rest Is Easy to Hold

What is at rest

is easy to hold.

What has not shown up

is easy to take into account.

What is frail

is easy to break.

What is vague

is easy to dispel.

Do it before it exists;

govern it before there's disorder.

The most massive tree grows from a sprout;

the highest building rises from a pile of earth;

a journey of a thousand miles begins with a step.

Those who contrive spoil it;

those who cling lose it.

Thus sages contrive nothing,

and so spoil nothing.

They cling to nothing,

and so lose nothing.

Therefore people's works

are always spoiled
on the verge of completion.

Be as careful of the end

as of the beginning,

and nothing will be spoiled.

Thus sages want to have no wants;

they do not value goods hard to get.

They learn not learning

to recover from people's excesses,

thereby to assist

the naturalness of all beings,

without daring to contrive.

When things are stable, it is easy to hold.

When problems have not occurred, they are easy to cope with.

When things are brittle, they break easily.

When things are tiny, they dissolve easily.

Prepare for problems before they appear.

Put things in order before they become chaotic.

Giant trees grow from tiny seeds.

High-rise buildings start from the first mound of earth.

Long journeys begin with a first step.

People often fail when the tasks are close to complete.

If they keep working as diligently as the beginning, then they would not fail.

Sages want things others do not want.

They do not treasure rare goods.

They study things others ignore.

They remind themselves of others' mistakes.

They let everything develops naturally and do not dare to force it.

What is still is easy to keep.

What does not manifest yet is easy to deal with.

What is fragile is easily broken.

What is small is easily scattered.

Deal with a thing before it occurs.

Repair a thing before it is in disorder.

A tree as big as a man's embrace springs from a tiny sprout.

A nine story tower begins with a basket of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles starts from where one stands.

To do is to fail.

To grip is to lose.

Therefore the sage does not do and so does not fail, does not grip and so does not lose.

In handling affairs, people often fail just at the point of completion.

Be as careful at the end as at the beginning, then there will be no failure.

Therefore, the sage desires no-desire, does not prize rare goods, learns non-learning, helps the masses return from their ignorance.

He wants to help all creatures to live by their own nature, and does not interfere with them.

The present is easy to be grasped or maintained.

The future can easily be planned.

The brittle is easily shattered.

The minute is easily scattered.

Deal with it before it happens.

Set things in order before the chaos.

A tree as great as a man's embrace springs from a small shoot.

A terrace nine stories high begins with a pile of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles starts under one's feet.

Doing without following the above (Tao),

he fails.

Trying hold on something without following the above (Tao),

he losses.

The sage follows Wu-Wei (not doing anything against the above),

will not fail,

not holding (any wrong notion),

will not loss.

People usually give up (being paranoid) when they are on the verge of success.

Must give as much care to the end as to the beginning;

there will be no failure.

Therefore the sage values of being not a paranoid,

does not value precious things.

He learns from Nature (not from knowledge),

not repeats mistakes of others,

follows (and utilizes) the laws of nature.

He is afraid of doing (anything not-Tao).

Peace is easily maintained while things are still at rest.

Trouble is easily handled before it starts.

What is brittle is easily broken.

What is minute is easily scattered.

Handle
a problem before it appears.

Secure order before confusion begins.

A
tree as big as a person's embrace begins as a tiny shoot.

A terrace nine stories high rises from a shovelful of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins under your feet.

A
person who interferes does harm,

and those who grasp lose their hold.

Therefore, the True Person acts without striving and does no

harm,

avoids grabbing and never loses hold.

People
often ruin their ventures

when they are on the verge of success.

So, be as careful at the end as at the beginning,

and your work will not be ruined.

Therefore,
the True Person seeks freedom from desire,

does not value things that are hard to come by,

learns without scholarship,

brings people back to what they have passed by,

and assists the ten thousand things to find their own

natures;

all without daring to interfere.

Silence
is easy to break

future is easy to plan

gentle is easy to hurt

tiny is easy to lose

Look ahead, see forms before they become things

deal with them before they become

set them in order before they collide

See

the sequoia began as small as a bean sprout

the skyscraper began as a hole in the earth

the longest trip begins with the first step.

Act,
and you hurt

grab, and it slips away

own, and it is stolen

believe, and it is shown false.

The wise

do not act, and nothing is hurt

do not grab, and nothing slips

do not own, and nothing is lost

do not believe, and nothing is false

Others
fall short right before their long-awaited success.

The end is as important as the beginning,

thus the wise person

wants only the unwanted;

values the common, not the scarce;

teaches the things that others don't;

returns others to the past they left behind,

such that everything is valued for itself by itself

all done by not doing.

What remains placid is quite easy to hold.

Not determined happenings can be prepared for well in advance. Before there
has been an omen it's easy to lay plans. It's easy to forestall some things
that don't are or not yet occur. It's quite easy to plan for and prepare well
in advance.

[But
such forestalling is had by thoughts, and thoughts are airy and can be tender
and brittle, to say the least.] And what's brittle is easy to crack. What's
tender is easily torn. What's brittle like ice is easy to melt. And what's tiny
is easy to scatter.

[All the same, reach up to] deal with things in their state of not-yet-being;
deal with things well before they appear. Just put things well in shape before
disorder and confusion. Put all very well in order before disorder, and next
go on to check loss or disorder well. A tree as big as a man's hug grows from
a tiny sprout. A tower nine storeys high begins with a clod of earth. Further,
the journey of three hundred miles began with ... the feet. A journey of a thousand
li begins right where one stands, even with the very first step.

Still, he who takes a [visible forestalling] action fails. Who acts, harms;
he who grabs, lets slip. And therefore the wise man doesn't act in the open,
and so doesn't spoil or harm; yes, he takes seemingly no action and therefore
hardly fails.

And why is this? It's due to: He who grasps things [often] loses them. He doesn't
grasp a lot, he doesn't let slip a lot. Does hardly grab in the open, and so
doesn't let slip a lot. He grasps nothing visibly to others, and therefore he
doesn't lose much. Whereas people in their handling of affairs often fail when
they're about to succeed at their tasks. Such people constantly spoil things
when within an ace of completing them.

Be
as careful at the end as at the start to avert failures at hand. Then there
will be no such failures. Heed the end no less than the start, so that your
valuable work will not be spoiled and ruined.

Therefore the wise man learns to seem unlearned, wants only things that are
unwanted. Yes, the wise man publicly desires to have no desire. Therefore the
wise man desires no desire - and desires all the same.

He doesn't often value rare treasures publicly. He hardly values objects hard
to get or find - in public. He says he learns that which is unlearned. He claims
he sets no store by products difficult to get, and so teaches things untaught.
[It's a trap.]

But he also turns all beings back to the very thing they have left behind, so
that he can assist in the course of nature somehow. And if so, "the ten thousand
creatures" can be restored to their self-sameness, the self-so which is of [some]
dao. Yes, he supports all things in some of their natural states.

This he does; but hardly presume to interfere all right. He hardly dares to
act in the open. So he denies to take any visible action.

What is secure is easily grasped,

What has no omens is easily forestalled,

What is brittle is easily split,

What is minuscule is easily dispersed.

Act before there is a problem;

Bring order before there is disorder.

A tree that fills the arms' embrace is born from a downy shoot;

A terrace nine layers high starts from a basketful of earth;

An ascent of a hundred strides begins beneath one's foot.

Who acts fails;

Who grasps loses.

For this reason,

The sage does not act.

Therefore,

He does not fail.

He does not grasp.

Therefore,

He does not lose.

In pursuing their affairs, people often fail when they are close to success.

Therefore,

If one is as cautious at the end as at the beginning, there will be no failures.

For this reason,

The sage desires to be without desire and does not prize goods that are hard to obtain;

He learns not to learn and reverts to what the masses pass by.

Thus,

he can help the myriad creatures be natural, but dares not act.

What is small is easily held.

What is expected is easily provided for.

What is brittle is easily broken.

What is small is soon dispersed.

Transact your business before it takes shape.

Regulate things before confusion begins.

The tree which fills the arms grew from a tender shoot.

The castle of nine storeys was raised on a heap of earth.

The journey of a thousand miles begins with one step.

Whoever designs only destroys.

Whoever grasps, loses.

The Sage does not act thus, therefore he does no harm.

He does not grasp, and therefore he never loses.

But the common people, in their undertakings, fail on the eve of success.

If they were as prudent at the end as they are at the beginning, there would be no such failures.

Therefore the Sage is only ambitious of what others despise, and sets no value on things difficult to obtain.

He acquires no common learning, but returns to that which people have passed by.

Thus he aims at simple development in all things, and acts without design.

The Small Step

If you are attentive and careful,

you can notice the tiny seeds of kindness

and give them nourishment.

You can see hints of discord

and easily turn them to peace.

If you are blindly pursuing your agendas

you ignore these seeds and hints,

and reap a harvest of trouble.

Seeds of love can be fed and watered,

but never forced to grow.

You do not have to teach a seed its duty,

it grows because that is its nature.

You do not have to teach each other love.

It will flourish because that is your nature.

But you must be patient.

Be patient as the seeds of your love

grow and mature.

It does not have to happen all at once.

Each day, each moment,

adds one more small element

to the magnificent pattern.

What remains still is easy to hold. What is not yet manifest is easy
to plan for. What is brittle is easy to crack. What is minute is easy to
scatter.

Deal with things before they appear. Put things in order before disorder arises.

A tree as big as a man's embrace grows from a tiny shoot. A tower of
nine stories begins with a heap of earth. The journey of a thousand li
starts from where one stands.

He who takes action fails. He who grasps things loses them. For this
reason the sage takes no action and therefore does not fail. He grasps
nothing and therefore does not lose anything;

A sane man is sane in knowing what things he can spare, In not wishing
what most people wish, In not reaching for things that seem rare.

Therefore the sage desires to have no desire, He does not value rare
treasures. He learns to be unlearned, and returns to what the multitude
has missed (Tao). Thus he supports all things in their natural state but
does not take any action.

Before it move,
hold it,

Before it go wrong, mould it,

Drain off water in winter before it freeze,

Before weeds grow, sow them to the breeze.

You can deal with what has not happened, can foresee

Harmful events and not allow them to be.

Though-- as naturally as a seed becomes a tree of arm-wide girth-

There can rise a nine-tiered tower from a man's handful of earth

Or here at your feet a thousand-mile journey have birth,

Quick action bruises,

Quick grasping loses.

Therefore a sane man's care is not to exert

One move that can miss, one move that can hurt.

Most people who miss, after almost winning,

Should have 'known the end from the beginning.'

A sane man is sane in knowing what things he can spare,

In not wishing what most people wish,

In not reaching for things that seem rare.

The cultured might call him heathenish,

This man of few words, because his one care

Is not to interfere but to let nature renew

The sense of direction men undo.

When the situation is peaceful, it is easy to control;

when nothing has happened, it is easy to plan;

Brittle things are easily broken, thin things are easily dispersed.

Do things when they have not yet happened, control things when they are not yet out of control.

A full-grown tree began as a sapling;

A nine-story building began with a bucket of dirt;

A thousand-mile trip began with the first step.

If you fiddle with something for your own purposes, you will ruin it;

If you are stubborn, you will fail.

Therefore, the great men practiced WUWEI, so they did not fail anything;

They were not stubborn, so they did not make mistakes.

People often fail at the last step to success.

Be cautious at the end like you are at the beginning; then you will never fail.

Therefore, the great men treated having no desire as their desire, and did not value things that were precious.

They treated not learning as learning, and repaired the mistakes people had made.

They helped everything and made them natural, but did not dare to do things for their own purposes.

That which has balance is easy to maintain.

That which has not arisen is easy to forestall.

That which is brittle is easy to shatter.

That which is minuscule is easy to scatter.

Therefore, manage problems before they arise;

Create order before disorder sets in.

A tree as large as the arms' embrace grows from a downy shoot.

A terrace nine stories high rises from a shovelful of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.

One who acts from the delusion of grandiosity fails.

One who clings to the delusion of grandiosity loses.

The sage does not act from delusion, and therefore he does not fail,

Nor does he cling to delusion, and therefore he does not lose.

Because of the delusion of grandiosity,

On the verge of success, people often fail.

If they would take as much care at the end as at the beginning,

They would not fail in their affairs.

The sage does not desire what the masses desire;

He does not treasure what the masses treasure.

He studies what the masses do not study;

He returns to the source of knowledge ignored by the masses.

Thus, without acting in delusion,

The sage supports all beings as they naturally exist.

What is still is easy to keep.

What has not developed is easy to guide.

What is fragile is easy to break.

What is little is easy to scatter.

One starts a project before things develop otherwise.

One prevents tumults before they happen otherwise.

A huge tree starts from a small sprout.

A nine-story tower starts from the first shovel full of dirt.

A long journey starts from the spot under the feet.

One who willfully starts a cause will ruin it.

One who willfully ends a cause will lose it.

The wise person does nothing willfully

And will therefore neither ruin nor lose.

People often fail when they are about to succeed.

If one is careful from start to end, one will not fail.

The wise ruler therefore desires what none would desire,

Values what none would value, learns what none can learn,

Remembers the useful experiences and lessons of all,

And does nothing willfully so as to help cultivate the natural.

Peace and tranquility are easy to hold onto and keep.

It is best to deal with matters before they present themselves.

What is brittle shatters easily.

What is small is easy to disperse.

Deal with troubles before they have arisen.

Establish order before disorder has reared itself.

A large tree grows from a small twig.

A terrace nine levels high starts with a clod of earth.

A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.

If you rush into action heedlessly you will rush into your own failure.

If you try to grasp things you will lose your grip.

Therefore the sage does not try to rush to completion, and he does not grasp all about for things.

In this way he avoids failure and losing.

Often people fail in their endeavors on the verge of completion,

this is because they exercise care at the beginning, and then slacken near the end.

Take as full care of tasks at the end as at the beginning, this will ensure proper completion.

Therefore the sage desires nothing so much as to be free from desire.

He does not treasure things that are difficult to procure.

He learns to not know.

He practices a return to the natural origin of all things without a practice to that end.

