===== Chapter 54 =====

That which is well established is not rooted up.

That which is well embraced does not slip away.

Children and grandchildren, using honorary rites

Offer sacrifices unceasingly.

Cultivate it in the body—it's virtue shall be Genuineness.

Cultivate it in the family—it's virtue shall be [Having] Surplus.

Cultivate it in the village—it's virtue shall be Endurance.

Cultivate it in the nation—it's virtue shall be Abundance.

Cultivate it in the world—it's virtue shall be Universality.

Therefore:

By means of the body, watch the body.

By means of the family, watch the family.

By means of the village, watch the village.

By means of the nation, watch the nation.

By means of the world, watch the world.

By what means do I know the world aright?

By this.

Well planted, not uprooted. Well embraced, never lost. Descendants will continue The ancestral rituals.

Maintain oneself: Te becomes real. Maintain the family: Te becomes
abundant. Maintain the community: Te becomes extensive. Maintain the
country: Te becomes public. Maintain the world: Te becomes omnipresent.

Therefore, Through self contemplate self, Through family contemplate
family, Through community contemplate community, Through country
contemplate country, Through world contemplate world.

How do I know the world? Like this!

What is firmly set up cannot be unsettled.

What is firmly embraced cannot slip away.

The ancestor worship continues without cease.

Practice virtue in your self

And your virtue will become genuine.

Practice virtue in your family

And your virtue will overflow.

Practice virtue in your district

And your virtue will last long.

Practice virtue in your country

And your virtue will abound.

Practice virtue throughout the world

And your virtue will spread wide.

So use the individual to judge the individual.

Use the family to judge the family.

Use the district to judge the district.

Use the state to judge the state.

Use the world to judge the world.

How do I know the way of the world?

I do because of what's within me.

CULTIVATING TE

Of the Tao:

Being well planted, one is not uprooted.

Having a firm grasp, one will not slip.

Being honored by one's family from generation to generation,

Its Te is everlasting.

Of the Te:

Cultivated in one's self, it becomes genuine.

Cultivated in one's family, it becomes abundant.

Cultivated in one's community, it will multiply.

Cultivated in one's land, it will flourish.

Cultivated in the world, it universally pervades All Things.

Truly:

As is the individual, so the individual is known.

As is the family, so the family is known.

As is the community, so the community is known.

As is the land, so the land is known.

As is the world, so the world is known.

Thus, from within one's self are All Things known.

If it is well established, it cannot be uprooted.

If you skillfully embrace it, it will not leave.

For generations, yearly offerings to it have not ceased.

Cultivate it in your body.

The action of the soul is then real.

Cultivate it in the family (clans).

The action of the soul is then in surplus.

Cultivate it in the village.

The action of the soul lasts a long time.

Cultivate it in the country.

The action of the soul is in abundance.

Cultivate it in Heaven below (the sacred body).

The action of the soul is universal.

The body recognizes the body.

The family recognizes the family.

The village recognizes the village.

The country recognizes the country.

Heaven below recognizes Heaven below.

How do I perceive Heaven below being so?

I perceive it through this.

THE WITNESS OF WISDOM

If a man plant according to the Tao it will never be uprooted; if he thus

gather, it will never be lost. His sons and his son's sons, one

following another, shall honour the shrine of their ancestor.

The
Tao, applied to oneself, strengtheneth the Body, to the

family, bringeth wealth; to the district, prosperity; to

the state, great fortune. Let it be the Law of the Kingdom, and

all men will increase in virtue.

Thus
we observe its effect in every case, as to the person, the family,

the district, the state, and the kingdom.

How
do I know that this is thus universal under Heaven?

By experience.

What (Tao's) skilful planter plants can never be uptorn; What his skilfularms enfold, From him can ne'er be borne. Sons shall bring in lengtheningline, Sacrifices to his shrine. Tao when nursed within one's self, Hisvigour will make true; And where the family it rules What riches will accrue!The neighbourhood where it prevails In thriving will abound; And when 'tisseen throughout the state. Good fortune will be found. Employ it the kingdomo'er, And men thrive all around.

In this way the effect will be seen in the person, by the observationof different cases; in the family; in the neighbourhood; in the state;and in the kingdom. How do I know that this effect is sure to hold thusall under the sky? By this (method of observation).

One who is rooted in this unfair world,

Won't be easy to unsettle

One who holds on to that world, can't let go

Therefore their children will suffer until the third and fourth generation

But one who follows his conscience

Will lead an impeccable life

One who takes care that his fellow men follow their conscience,

Makes them flourish

One who takes care that his neighbours follow their conscience,

Makes them examples for everybody else

And when all of mankind follows its conscience,

There shall be a paradise on earth

Look at yourself if you want to understand yourself

Discover the connections and patterns in the way your nearest relations,

Cities and the nations, get on with each other

Because what's on a small scale, is on a big scale, too

How do I know it is that way?

Because I've done this myself

What is deeply rooted in Nature cannot be uprooted. He who embraces Nature's way as his own will not easily go astray; And his children and grandchildren will continue to emulate him.

If one embodies Nature's way in his own life, he will be genuinely intelligent. If he establishes it in his family, his home life will be felicitous. If he cultivates it in he community, his future will be prosperous. If he fosters it in his state, his future will be auspicious. If he inspires in in the whole country, his benefit will become universal. Thus one's own individual life serves as an example for other individuals.

One's family life serves as an example for other individuals. One's family life serves as a model for other families. One's community serves as a standard for other communities. One's state serves as an ideal for other states.

How do I know all this? It is obvious.

What Tao plants cannot be plucked,

What Tao clasps, cannot slip.

By its virtue alone can one generation after another carry on the ancestrial sacrifice.

Apply it to yourself and by its power you will be freed from dross.

Apply it to your household and your household shall thereby have abundance.

Apply it to the village, and the village will be made secure.

Apply it to the kingdom, and the kingdom shall thereby be made to flourish.

Apply it to an empire, and the empire shall thereby be extended.

Therefore just as through oneself one may contemplate Oneself,

So through the household one may contemplate the Household,

And through the village, one may contemplate the Village,

And through the kingdom, one may contemplate the Kingdom,

And through the empire, one may contemplate the Empire.

How do I know that the empire is so?

By this.

What is deeply rooted will not topple.

What is firmly grasped will not slip away.

It will be honored through generations of ancestors.

Cultivated in the self, Virtue is manifest.

Cultivated in the family, Virtue grows.

Cultivated in the village, Virtue flourishes.

Cultivated in the nation, Virtue abounds.

Cultivated in the universe, Virtue is everything.

As the self, observe the self.

As the family, observe the family.

As the village, observe the village.

As the nation, observe the nation.

As the universe, observe the universe.

How do I know the universe?

Like this.

What is well established is not uprooted

What is well embraced is not taken away

Children & grandchildren, accordingly,

make offerings & sacrifice without fail

Cultivate this in the person

Its character grows true

Cultivate this in the family

Its character grows ample

Cultivate this in the community

Its character grows enduring

Cultivate this in the country

Its character grows bountiful

Cultivate this in the world

Its character grows universal

And so, use person to examine the person

With family, examine the family

With community, examine the community

With country, examine the country

With the world, examine the world

So how are we to know that the world

is really like this?

Through This

Go by love

What is firmly set up

cannot be pulled down.

What is firmly embraced cannot slip away.

And our sons and grandsons, as a result,

Will sacrifice without end.

When you cultivate it in your self,

Your virtue will then be genuine;

When you cultivate it in your family,

Your virtue will then overflow;

When you cultivate it in your village,

Your virtue will then be long lasting;

When you cultivate it in your nation,

Your virtue will then be abundant;

When you cultivate it throughout the world,

Your virtue will then be widespread.

Use the individual to examine the individual;

Use the family to examine the family;

Use the village to examine the village;

Use the nation to examine the nation;

And use the world to examine the world.

How do I know that the world is so?

By this!

Plant yourself firmly in the Tao and you won't ever be uprooted. Embrace Tao firmly and you won't ever be separated from it. Your children will thrive, and your children's children.

Cultivate goodness in your self, and goodness will be genuine. Cultivate it in your family, and goodness will flourish. Cultivate it in your community, and goodness will grow and multiply. Cultivate it in your country, and goodness will be abundant. Cultivate it in the world, and goodness will be everywhere.

How do I know the world works like this? By watching.

With a firm inner foundation,

You cannot be toppled.

An embrace is all the grasp you need

To be safe within.

An offering of simple honor,

From the children of the past

To the children of the present

Supports the children of the future.

Why do you cultivate your image

When your natural being is already full?

Why aggrandize your family pride

When the perfection of family is complete?

Why meddle with your community

When its natural form is imperishable?

Why do you fight to enrich your nation

When its simple order is abundance?

Why divide and oppose earth and heaven

When the purity of their union is unalterable?

Therefore, examine yourself

To become your Self.

Examine your home

To become a family.

Examine your village

To become a community.

Examine the state

To become a nation.

Examine the world

To become one with Being.

How do I know

That this is the way of Nature?

Because I asked It,

From within my deepest self.

Whatever is firmly planted is not easily uprooted.

Whatever is firmly grasped is not easily loosened.

Generation follows generation, continuing endlessly.

Accept
Tao in yourself and Teh is yours.

Accept Tao in the family and Teh is abundant.

Accept Tao in the village and Teh multiplies.

Accept Tao in the nation and Teh flourishes.

Accept Tao in the world and Teh is universal.

Therefore,
one can measure by Teh:

By your Teh gauge the family.

By the family's Teh gauge the village.

By the village's Teh gauge the nation.

By the nation's Teh gauge the world.

How
do I know this is so? By seeing it so!

Who plants well will not have his work uprooted; who embraces well will not lose what he holds; the offerings of his sons and grandsons will never end.

Who thus regulates himself has virtue which is genuine; who thus regulates his household has virtue which overflows; who thus regulates his neighbourhood has virtue which excels; who thus regulates the state has virtue which abounds; who thus regulates the world has virtue which is universal.

Therefore let every man prove himself; let each household, neighbourhood, and state do the same; let the world also follow the same course.

How do I know that it must be thus with the world? By this same (which has just been said).

What is planted by the best planter can never be removed;

What is embraced by the best embracer can never be loosened.

Thus his children and grandchildren will be able to continue their ancestral sacrifice for endless generations.

If he applies Tao to himself his virtue will be genuine;

If he applies it to his family his virtue will be abundant;

If he applies it to his villiage his virtue will be lasting;

If he applies it to his country his virtue will be full;

If he applies it to the world his virtue will be universal.

Therefore by one's person one may observe persons;

By one's family one may observe families;

By one's village one may observe villages;

By one's country one may observe countries;

By one's world, one may observe worlds.

How do I know that the world may be so (governed by Tao)?

By this (observation).

Culturing Perspectives

Worthy builders do not tear down.

Worthy embracers do not let go.

Sons and grandsons never stop sacrificing.

Culture it in one self

and its virtuosity is authenticity.

Culture it in a family

and its virtuosity is sufficiency.

Culture it in a village

and its virtuosity is elders.

Culture it in a state

and its virtuosity is wealth.

Culture it in the social world

and its virtuosity is universality.

Hence use 'self' to view the self.

'Family' to view the family.

'Village' to view the village.

'State' to view the state.

'Social world' to view the social world.

How do I know the social world's condition?

With this.

Nothing can be taken away if it is well-founded.

Nothing can be lost if it is well-grasped.

For generations to come, the worship will not be discontinued.

To cultivate (Tao) in one's self makes attainment real.

To cultivate (Tao) in one's family makes attainment a surplus.

To cultivate (Tao) in one's community makes attainment long-lasting.

To cultivate (Tao) in one's nation makes attainment abundant.

To cultivate (Tao) in one's world makes attainment all-embracing.

Thus, through the self, one contemplates the self.

Through the family, one contemplates the family.

Through the community, one contemplates the community.

Through the nation, one contemplates the nation.

Through the world, one contemplates the world.

How do I know the world as world?

It is through this.

He who is well established cannot be uprooted.

He who is holding tight cannot slip away.

His descendants will never cease to honour him.

He who cultivates the moral character, his virtue will be clear.

He who cultivates his own family, his virtue will flourish.

He who cultivates the village, his virtue will endure.

He who cultivates the country, his virtue will be abundant.

He who cultivates the land, his virtue will be widespread.

Therefore look at others as at your own person.

Look at other families as at your own family.

Look at other villages as at your own village.

Look at other countries as at your own country.

Look at other lands as at your own land.

How do I know it is like this under Heaven?

By means of this.

He who excels in planting something -

Nobody can pull it up;

He who excels in embracing something -

Nobody can snatch it away.

His offspring will thereby offer sacrifices without end.

Cultivate it in your own person,

Your virtue will be genuine;

Cultivate it in your own fief,

Your virtue will be more than enough;

Cultivate it in your own prefecture,

Your virtue will be long-enduring;

Cultivate it in your own state,

Your virtue will be abundant;

Cultivate it in the empire,

Your virtue will be universal.

Observe other persons from your own person;

Observe other fiefs from your own fief;

Observe other prefectures from your own prefecture;

Observe other states from your own state;

Observe the empire from all under heaven.

How do I know what the empire is like?

From this.

Let me have knowledge and follow the great way of the Tao,

I alone am afraid of straying from this path.

The great way is easy and simple,

But people prefer byways.

The royal palaces are wonderfully maintained,

But the people's fields are full of thorns,

And the barns are empty.

There are those who wear expensive clothes,

There are those who carry polished swords,

There are those who gorge themselves on food and drink,

There are those who amass property and possessions:

This is called encouraging the robbers.

Is this not straying from the path of the Tao?

What is firmly rooted cannot be pulled out;

What is tightly held in the arms will not slip loose;

Through this the offering of sacrifice by descendants will never come to an
end.

Cultivate
it in your person

And its virtue will be genuine;

Cultivate it in the family

And its virtue will be more than sufficient;

Cultivate it in the hamlet

And its virtue will endure;

Cultivate it in the state

And its virtue will abound;

Cultivate it in the empire

And its virtue will be pervasive.

Hence
look at the person through the person;

Look at the family through the family;

Look at the hamlet through the hamlet;

Look at the state through the state;

Look at the empire through the empire.

How
do I know that the empire is like that?

By means of this.

The Cultivation of Inituition

"What is well planted is not uprooted;

What's well preserved can not be looted!"

By sons and grandsons the sacrificial celebrations shall not cease.

Who cultivates Reason in his person, his virtue is genuine.

Who cultivates it in his house, his virtue is overflowing.

Who cultivates it in his township, his virtue is lasting.

Who cultivates it in his country, his virtue is abundant.

Who cultivates it in the world, his virtue is universal.

Therefore,

By one's person one tests persons.

By one's house one tests houses.

By one's township one tests townships.

By one's country one tests countries.

By one's world one tests worlds.

How do I know that the world is such? Through IT.

If you are rooted in the Tao, you cannot be moved. If you hold to the Tao, time won't pass. You endlessly abide in the virtue of the Tao. When your life isn?t separate from the Tao, your true self is. When your family isn't separate, they will flower. When the earth isn't separate, it is abundant. When the universe isn?t separate, it is harmonious. From an atom, to the universe, there is no inside or outside. How do I know? By hearing with my eyes.

What is well planted will not uproot;

What is firmly held will not drop.

Descendants will not discontinue remembrance ceremonies.

Cultivating it in self, virtue is true;

Cultivating it in the family, virtue overflows;

Cultivating it in the village, virtue lasts;

Cultivating it in the state, virtue is abundant;

Cultivating it in the world, virtue is universal.

Thus,

look at self through self;

look at the family through the family;

look at the village through the village;

look at the state through the state;

look at the world through the world.

How do I know the world?

Because it is so.

Something planted so deep it's never rooted up,

something held so tight it's never stolen away:

children and grandchildren will pay it homage always.

Cultivated in yourself it makes Integrity real.

Cultivated in your family it makes Integrity plentiful.

Cultivated in your village it makes Integrity enduring.

Cultivated in your nation it makes Integrity abundant.

Cultivated in all beneath heaven it makes Integrity all-encompassing.

So look through self into self,

through family into family,

through village into village,

through nation into nation,

through all beneath heaven into all beneath heaven.

How can I know all beneath heaven as it is?

Through this.

A person who excels in building does not uproot;

A person who excels in embracing does not deviate;

And their descendants do not interrupt ancestral worship.\

Cultivate it in an individual, his virtue is genuine;

Cultivate it in a family, its virtue overflows;

Cultivate it in a community, its virtues multiply;

Cultivate it in a state, its virtue is abundant;

Cultivate it in the world, its virtue is universal.

Therefore, evaluate the virtue of:

An individual on the basis of the individual;

A family on the basis of the family;

A community o the basis of the community;

A state on the basis of the state;

The world on the basis of the world.

How do I know the situation of the world? By this.

That
which is valuably established is not weeded out

That which is valuably embraced is not shed off.

It
happens, children and grandchildren

Sacrifice to ancestors without reflection.

Tending
to relating to the body

Its ideal will be real

Tending to relating to the family

Its ideal will be bubbling over

Tending to relating to the community

Its ideal will be growing

Tending to relating to the nation

Its ideal will be abundant

Tending to relating to the world

Its ideal will be everywhere.

So
body happens seeing body

Family happens seeing family

Community happens seeing community

Nation happens seeing nation

World happens seeing world.

Why
does it happen that I know the nature of the world?

This just happens.

He who builds on disinterestedness will not find his work destroyed. He who keeps himself disinterested will not lose what he has. His sons and his grandsons will make offerings to him without interruption (that is to say, they will succeed him and enjoy the fruit of his works).

First of all one should conform oneself to the Principle; afterwards, this conformity will spread spontaneously, by itself, to one's family, district, principality, And to the empire; (like radiant heat coming from a central hearth).

Through one's own nature, one understands those of other individuals, And of all individual collectivities such as families, districts, principalities, And the empire.

How can one know the nature of an entire empire? ... By this (through one's own nature).

That which is well established cannot be uprooted

That which is strongly held cannot be taken

The descendants will commemorate it forever

Cultivate it in yourself, its virtue shall be true

Cultivate it in the family, its virtue shall be abundant

Cultivate it in the community, its virtue shall be lasting

Cultivate it in the country, its virtue shall be prosperous

Cultivate it in the world, its virtue shall be widespread

Therefore observe others with yourself

Observe other families with your family

Observe other communities with your community

Observe other countries with your country

Observe the world with the world

With what do I know the world?

With this

The well-established cannot be uprooted.

The well-grasped does not slip away.

Generation after generation carries out the ancestor worship without break.

Cultivate it in yourself and virtue will be real.

Cultivate it in the family and virtue will overflow.

Cultivate it in the town and virtue will be great.

Cultivate it in the country and virtue will abundant.

Cultivate it in the world and virtue will be everywhere.

Therefore, take yourself and observe yourself.

Take the family and observe the family.

Take the town and observe the town.

Take the country and observe the country.

Take the world and observe the world.

How do I know the world as it is?

By this.

Who plants well will not have his work uprooted; who embraces well will not lose what he holds;

the offerings of his sons and grandsons will never end.

Who thus regulates himself has virtue which is genuine; who thus regulates his household has virtue which overflows; who thus regulates his neighborhood has virtue which excels; who thus regulates the state has virtue which abounds; who thus regulates the world has virtue which is universal.

Therefore let every man prove himself; let each household, neighborhood, and state do the same; let the world also follow the same course.

How do I know that it must be thus with the world? By this same (which has been just said).

TO CULTIVATE INTUITION

The thing that is well planted is not easily uprooted. The thing that is well guarded is not easily taken away. If one has sons and grandsons, the offering of ancestral worship will not soon cease.

He who practices Tao in his person shows that his teh is real. The family that practices it shows that their teh is abounding. The township that practices it shows that their teh is enduring. The state that practices it shows that their teh is prolific. The empire that practices it reveals that teh is universal. Thereby one person becomes a test of other persons, one family of other families, one town of other towns, one county of other counties, and one empire of all empires.

How do I know that this test is universal? By this same Tao.

One who is well established is not uprooted,

One who embraces firmly cannot be separated from,

Thus sons and grandsons shall perform sacrifices without interruptions.

In cultivating this in one's person,

The person's te becomes genuine;

In cultivating this in the family,

The family's te has more to spare (yü);

In cultivating this in the village,

The village's te grows strong;

In cultivating this in the state,

The state's te becomes abundant;

In cultivating this in the world (t'ien hsia),

The world's te becomes universal.

Therefore observe (kuan) the person by the person,

Observe the family by the family,

Observe the village by the village,

Observe the state by the state,

Observe the world by the world.

How do I know such is the case in the world?

Through this.

Whatever is firmly planted is not easily uprooted; whatever is firmly grasped is not easily loosened. Thus, generation follows generation, continuing endlessly.

Accept Tao in yourself and Teh is yours; accept Tao in the family and Teh is abundant; accept Tao in the village and Teh multiplies; accept Tao in the nation and Teh flourishes; accept Tao in the world and Teh is universal.

Therefore one can measure by Teh: by your Teh gauge the family; by the family's Teh gauge the village; by the village's Teh gauge the nation; by the nation's Teh gauge the world. How do I know this is so? By seeing it so!

Kapitel nicht vorhanden / chapter not available

Fifty-four

What is firmly established cannot be uprooted.

What is firmly grasped cannot slip away.

It will be honored from generation to generation.

Cultivate Virtue in your self,

And Virtue will be real.

Cultivate it in the family,

And Virtue will abound.

Cultivate it in the village,

And Virtue will grow.

Cultivate it in the nation,

And Virtue will be abundant.

Cultivate it in the universe,

And Virtue will be everywhere.

Therefore
look at the body as body;

Look at the family as family;

Look at the village as village;

Look at the nation as nation;

Look at the universe as universe.

How
do I know the universe is like this?

By looking!

What is well planted cannot be pulled out;

What is well held cannot be disengaged;

The principle being observed,

The offering of sacrifice by descendants will be kept making for ever.

Similarly cultivating the principle in oneself,

One can purify his virtue;

Cultivating it in the family,

One makes his own virtue more than enough;

Cultivating it in the village,

One can have the virtue to be the leader;

Cultivating it in the state,

One can have the prodigious virtue;

Cultivating it in the world,

One can have the virtue widely known.

Hence I can have an insight

Into other individuals by examining myself;

Into other families by examining my family;

Into other villages by examining my village;

Into other states by examining my state;

Into other worlds by examining my world.

How do I know about the whole world?

By employing the method above.

What is firmly planted cannot be pulled out;

What is tightly held in the arms cannot slip away,

So that the descendants will never stop offering ancestral sacrifice.

Cultivate it in yourself,

And its Te will be genuine.

Cultivate it in the household,

And its Te will be more than sufficient.

Cultivate it in the village,

And its Te will be long-lasting.

Cultivate it in the state,

And its Te will be plentiful.

Cultivate it in all under Heaven,

And its Te will be all-encompassing.

Therefore, observe yourself through yourself;

The household through the household;

The village through the village;

The state through the state;

All under Heaven through all under Heaven.

How do I know that all under Heaven is so?

With this.

A person who is adept at increasing virtue will adhere to it unswervingly.

A person who holds steadfastly to his virtue will resolutely persist with it.

His deeds will endure because his progeny will continue to commemorate him for generations to come.

If he diligently cultivates his personal virtue, the virtue will be genuine.

Diligently cultivating virtue in a family, the virtue will be abundant.

Diligently cultivating virtue in a community, the virtue will be expansive.

Diligently cultivating virtue throughout the country, the virtue will be prolific.

Diligently cultivating virtue throughout the world, the virtue will be ubiquitous.

Therefore, looking from the individual perspective, you can see the benefit.

From the respective viewpoints of family, community, country or the world, the benefits are also obvious.

How do you know cultivating virtue will benefit the world?

It is through this inference.

Rectifying Viewpoints

Hsiu Kuan

Those adept in establishing themselves

Cannot be plucked up;

Those adept in the act of embracing

Cannot be made to relax their hold.

They are worshipped for generations in a row.

Cultivate Tao in one's person,

And its virtue will be genuine;

Cultivate Tao in one's family,

And its virtue will be overflowing;

Cultivate Tao in one's village,

And its virtue will be long enduring;

Cultivate Tao in one's state,

And its virtue will be abundant;

Cultivate Tao in one's empire,

And its virtue will be pervasive.

Therefore,

By one's person, one sizes up other persons;

By one's family, one sizes up other families;

By one's village, one sizes up other villages;

By one's state, one sizes up other states;

By one's empire, one sizes up other empires.

How do I know this is so with the empire?

By this.

That which is firmly implanted by the Tao will not be uprooted.

That which is firmly grasped by the Tao will not be unloosened.

As, through the Tao, Ancestral Sacrifices continue from children to grandchildren for countless generaitons,

So, if you cultivate the Tao in your self, your power will be true power;

If you cultivate the Tao in your family, your family through ts power will enjoy abundance;

If you cultivate the Tao in your village, your village through its power will grow in strength;

If you cultivate the Tao in your country, your country through its power will flourish;

If you cultivate the Tao in the community its power will be seen everywhere in the world.

For by looking into one's self one may become aware of others;

Through one's own family one may become aware of other families;

Through one's own village one may become aware of other villages;

Through one's own country one may become aware of other countries;

Through contemplating the community one may become aware of the Great Society of Mankind.

How do I know that the Great Society of Mankind may be so governed?

By This.

What is well planted won't be uprooted;

What is well grasped won't slip away.

Sons and grandsons will keep the sacrifices.

Practice virtue in yourself:

Virtue becomes real.

Practice it in the family;

It becomes abundant.

Practice it in the county,

It becomes increased.

Practice it in the country,

It becomes prolific.

Practice it beneath heaven,

It becomes universal.

Thus persons are to be looked at as a person,

Families as a family,

Counties as a county,

Countries as a country,

Beneath-heaven as beneath-heaven.

How do I know about beneath-heaven?

Inward light!

What is well planted cannot be pulled up.

What is closely embraced cannot slip away.

The wise establish virtue firmly within themselves, and are honored for generations ever after.

Apply natural, integral virtue to your own character,

and it will be genuine.

Apply natural, integral virtue to the family,

and it will abound.

Apply natural, integral virtue to the state,

and it will flourish abundantly.

Apply natural, integral virtue to the world,

and it will be pervasive.

Understand other people's lives by means of your own life.

Understand other people's families by means of your own family.

Understand other societies by means of your own society.

Understand other countries by means of your own country.

How can you know what is right for the world?

By knowing what is right for your own life.

LIV.

Cultivating
Broad Views

The
good planter never uproots,

The
good keeper holds to his prize,

And
sons and grandsons shall bring their fruits

In a
ceaseless sacrifice.

Who
practises Tao in his life,

His
virtues will ever be sound,

Who
practises it with his children and wife,

His
virtues will greatly abound.

Who
practises it in his town,

His
virtues will last and extend,

And
if in the state or the realm, then down

His
virtues will flow without end.

Test
others by oneself alone,

Test
families by one family,

And in
one town, and state, and realm will be shown

The
test of what others will be.

How
know I that this single source

Throughout
the whole world will act so?

By
this, that it is, in its ceaseless course,

Forever
the self-same flow.

He who is established in goodness shall not be uprooted.

He who cherishes goodness shall not be cast out.

His children to all generations shall be blessed unceasingly.

Cultivate it in the body, your Teh shall become true.

Cultivate it in the family, your Teh shall superabound.

Cultivate it in the village, your Teh shall endure.

Cultivate it in the kingdom, your Teh shall flourish.

Cultivate it in the world, your Teh shall be universal.

Therefore, according to the body, judge the body.

According to the family, judge the family.

According to the village, judge the village.

According to the kingdom, judge the kingdom.

According to the world, judge the world..

How shall I know that there is some faith in the world?

The witness is in itself.

What is well planted

cannot be uprooted.

What is well accepted

cannot slip away.

Your descendants

will pray for you

for ages without end.

Feed Virtue (Power)

in your own person,

And it becomes

a real part of you.

Feed Power in the family,

And it will stay.

Feed Power in the community,

And it will live and grow.

Feed Power in the state,

And it will be generously successful.

Feed Power in the World,

And it will become total.

A person must be judged as a person;

A family must be judged as family;

A community must be judged as a community;

A state must be judged as a state;

The world must be judged as a world.

How do I know about the world?

By what is within me.

That which is well planted is not uprooted.

That which is well clasped is not snatched away.

Sons and grandsons will then not interrupt their sacrifices.

If one practices (the Way) in one's person, its Virtue will be genuineness.

If one practices it in one's family, its Virtue will be abundance.

If one practices it in one's village, its Virtue will be durability.

If one practices it in one's state, its Virtue will be prosperity.

If one practices it in the Empire, its Virtue will be universality.

From the standpoint of one's own person one views other persons, from that of one's own family other families, from that of one's own village other villages, from that of one's own state other states, from that of the Empire the Empire.

How do I know that it is like this for the Empire?

By this.

What (Tao's) skilful planter plants

Can never be uptorn;

What his skilful arms enfold,

From him can ne'er be borne.

Sons shall bring in lengthening line,

Sacrifices to his shrine.

Tao
when nursed within one's self,

His vigour will make true;

And where the family it rules

What riches will accrue!

The neighbourhood where it prevails

In thriving will abound;

And when 'tis seen throughout the state,

Good fortune will be found.

Employ it the kingdom o'er,

And men thrive all around.

In
this way the effect will be seen in the person, by the

observation of different cases; in the family; in the neighbourhood;

in the state; and in the kingdom.

How
do I know that this effect is sure to hold thus all under the

sky? By this (method of observation).

What is firmly established cannot be uprooted;
what is tightly embraced
cannot slip away.
Thus,
the prayers of sons and grandsons will never end!
Cultivated
in the person, DEI is true.
Cultivated in the family, DEI is ample.

Cultivated in the village, DEI lasts long.
Cultivated in the state, DEI is
abundant.
Cultivated everywhere under heaven, DEI is vast.
Observe
other people through your own person.
Observe other families through your
own family.
Observe other villages through your own village.
Observe
other states through your own state.
Observe all under heaven through all
of these.
How
do I know the nature of all under heaven? By LOOKING!

Hold
fast to this awareness

Seeing that it is your root

It will not ever slip away

This ever present absolute

It
cannot be uprooted

It's always held in veneration

Discovered very close at hand

In every generation

Allow
its presence in your life

Awareness real and profound

Allow it in the family

Its blessings will abound

And
if you care to share it

With neighbor and with friend

Its potency will multiply

With benefits that never end

You
ask me how I know it's true

It isn't something I mistook

Well nothing is more obvious

The only thing I do is look

WHAT is well planted cannot be uprooted.

What is well embraced cannot slip away.

Your descendants will carry on the ancestral sacrifice for generations without end.

Cultivate Virtue in your own person,

And it becomes a genuine part of you.

Cultivate it in the family,

And it will abide.

Cultivate it in the community,

And it will live and grow.

Cultivate it in the state,

And it will flourish abundantly.

Cultivate it in the world,

And it vill become universal.

Hence, a person must be judged as person;

A family as family;

A community as community;

A state as state;

The world as world.

How do I know about the world?

By what is within me.

What is skillfully rooted and well established cannot effortlessly be uprooted, what is well embraced cannot be easily torn away.

Hold onto the Tao firmly, and you will endure. This will pass on to your children and grandchildren also.

When virtue is cultivated in oneself, it becomes real.

When cultivated in the home, virtue will overflow.

When virtue is cultivated in the community it becomes lasting.

When cultivated in the nation, virtue becomes abundant.

When virtue is cultivated in the world, it becomes the Law of the land, and it leads to universal virtue, all pervading and all encompassing.

Therefore one can see that ones self influences the family.

The family influences the community. The community influences the nation. And the nation influences the world.

Therefore, bring virtue into your own life, and it will spread all about you, into the world.

How do I know this is true? Because I have seen virtue move and live.

That which is well built

will never be torn down.

That which is well latched

can not slip away.

Those who do things well

will be honored from generation to generation.

If
this idea is cultivated in the individual,

then his virtue will become genuine.

If this idea is cultivated in your family,

then virtue in your family will be great.

If this idea is cultivated in your community,

then virtue will go a long way.

If this idea is cultivated in your country,

then virtue will be in many places.

If this idea is cultivated in the world,

then virtue will be with everyone.

Then
observe the person for what the person does,

and observe the family for what it does,

and observe the community for what it does,

and observe the country for what it does,

and observe the world for what it does.

How do I know this saying is true?

I observe these things and see.

Do you want to be a positive influence in the world? First, get your own life in order. Ground yourself in the single principle so that your behaviour is wholesome and effective. If you do that, you will earn respect and be a powerful influence.

Your behaviour influences others through a ripple effect. A ripple effect works because everyone influences everyone else. Powerful people are powerful influences.

If your life works, you influence your family.

If your family works, your family influences the community.

If your community works, your community influences the nation.

If your nation works, your nation influences the world.

If your world works, the ripple effect spreads throughout the cosmos.

Remember that your influence begins with you and ripples outward. So be sure that your influence is both potent and wholesome.

How do I know all this works?

All growth spreads outward from a fertile and potent nucleus. You are a nucleus.

One who is well grounded will not be uprooted.

One who has a firm embrace will not let go.

His descendants will faithfully carry on his tradition.

Cultivate these things in yourself

And you will have true goodness.

Cultivate these in your family

And goodness will increase.

Cultivate these in your community

And goodness will catch on.

Cultivate these in your nation

And goodness will overflow!

Cultivate these in the World

And goodness will fil the Universe.

And so, let the self examine the self.

Let the family consider the family.

Let the community examine the community.

Let the nation evaluate the nation.

Let the World contemplate the World.

How do I know the World is like this?

Through these:

Grounding and embracing.

The
essence of Infinity can be ignored but never

uprooted.

If it is acknowledged, it cannot be lost

and it will manifest peace and harmony

from parents to children forever.

Acknowledge
it in yourself

and peace and harmony will become real.

Acknowledge it in your family

and peace and harmony will grow.

Acknowledge it in your town

and peace and harmony will influence your

teachers.

Acknowledge it in your nation

and peace and harmony will displace war.

Acknowledge it in the universe

and peace and harmony will be everywhere.

Therefore,

see others as yourself,

see other families as your family,

see other towns as your town,

see other nations as your nation,

see the universe as a manifestation

of the Infinite.

How
do I know this is the way things are?

Because I am at one with Infinity.

What is well established is not uprooted.

What is well accepted is not cast off.

Thus will your children's children offer sacrifices forever.

Cultivated in the person, its virtue becomes genuine.

Cultivated in the home, its virtue multiplies.

Cultivated in the village, its virtue grows.

Cultivated in the nation, its virtue increases.

Cultivated in the world, its virtue becomes universal.

Thus does

a person judge a person,

a family judge a family,

a village judge a village,

a nation judge a nation,

a world judge a world.

How can I recognize an ideal world ?

By this.

What is well-planted cannot be uprooted;

What is grasped tightly cannot slip away;

Just as ancestral sacrifices will never be suspended.

Cultivate Tao in yourself

And Virtue will be real.

Cultivate it in the family

And Virtue will be plentiful.

Cultivate it in the community

And Virtue will increase.

Cultivate it in the state

And Virtue will flourish.

Cultivate it in the world

And Virtue will be universal.

Hence, judge a person as a person,

A family as a family,

A community as a community,

A state as a state,

The world as a world.

How do I know the world is like this?

Through observation.

A well-founded establishment cannot be uprooted,

And a well-preserved tradition can not be dissolved:

Each will go on generation after generation.

One has true being when one keeps the Way body and soul,

Effective being when one extends the Way over the family,

Long being when one extends the Way over the community,

Rich being when one extends the Way over a nation,

Universal being when one extends the Way over the world.

Therefore, one knows others by looking at one's self,

Other communities by looking at one's own community,

Other states through the comparison with one's own state

And other worlds by inferring from one's own world.

That's how I come to know the world.

Excellently founded: it will not be uprooted Excellently embraced and cared for: it will not slip away so sons and grandsons will never cease to offer the sacrifices.

Cultivate It in your person, its Te will be pure cultivate It in the clan, its Te will be abundant cultivate It in the village, its Te will be lasting cultivate It in the state, its Te will be ample cultivate It in the empire, its Te will be all-embracing.

Yes: Judge a person taking that person as the measure judge a clan taking that clan as the measure judge a village taking that village as the measure judge a state taking that state as the measure judge the world taking the world as the measure.

How do I know the nature of the world? By this.

By cognizing yourself, you cognize others. Help others — and you will cognize everything.

He who can stand firmly cannot be overturned. He who can lean against support cannot be knocked down. Yes, such a person will be remembered by ancestors!

But when you become firmly established in Tao, then you will shine at other people with Its Light like rising sun!

Try to help in this to your family, to people living in your country and everywhere! By doing this you will gain great power of consciousness.

How did I cognize it? By doing this...

The Wise Person will carefully plant his plant-seeds,

He strongly builds his house,

Thus his careful and well-done actions

Will be examples for many generations to come.

By
practicing the Tao Way for himself,

The Wise Person practices the Virtue (Te).

Followed by a family, the Virtue brings prosperity,

Followed by a community, that community will flourish.

Followed by an entire country,

That country becomes a good example for other countries,

Followed by the whole world, the Virtue has universal value.

If
a man followed Virtue, he is an example for his family,

When a family follows Virtue, it is an example for the community,

If a community follows Virtue, it is an example for the country,

If a country follows Virtue is an example for the whole world.

This can be proved by observation.

What
is well built cannot be pulled up. What is well clasped cannot slip free. By
these means one's sons and grandsons will offer sacrifice unendingly. If it
is cultivated in one's person, then virtue will be genuine. If it is cultivated
in one's family, then virtue will be ample. If it is cultivated in one's local
community, then virtue will be enduring. If it is cultivated in one's kingdom,
then virtue will be plentiful. If it is cultivated in the world, then virtue
will be universal. So observe each person in terms of that person himself, observe
each family in terms of that family itself, observe each community in terms
of that community itself. Observe each kingdom in terms of that kingdom itself.
Observe the world in terms of the world itself. How do I know the way the world
is? By this.

To be built well is not to be toppled.

To be held fast is not to slip.

With this, children and grandchildren will never stop offering sacrifice to their ancestors.

With this to cultivate oneself, one's virtue will be true;

With this to cultivate the family, its virtue will be plentiful;

With this to cultivate the community, its virtue will last long;

With this to cultivate the nation, its virtue will be abundant;

With this to cultivate the world, its virtue will be good.

Therefore,

Examine a person with a person,

Examine a family with a family,

Examine a community with a community,

Examine a nation with a nation,

Examine a world with a world.

How can I know this is the way of the world?

By this.

Establishing a Universal View

What is skillfully established will not be uprooted;

What is skillfully grasped will not slip away.

Thus it is honored for generations.

Cultivate the inner self;

Its Power becomes real.

Cultivate the home;

Its Power becomes abundant.

Cultivate the community;

Its Power becomes greater.

Cultivate the organization;

Its Power becomes prolific.

Cultivate the world;

Its Power becomes universal.

Therefore through the inner self,

The inner self is conceived.

Through the home,

The home is conceived.

Through the community,

The community is conceived.

Through the organization,

The organization is conceived.

Through the world,

The world is conceived.

How do I know the world?

Through this.

Look at yourself in a mirror. When you see yourself smile, you feel good. When you smile at others, they feel good. Be true to your nature and you will true to the Dao. It will reflect on your children and your neighbors and spread like the sun.

Set firm in the Way: none shall uproot you;

Cherish it well and none shall estrange you;

Your children's children faithful shall serve

Your forebears at the altar of your house.

Cultivate
the Way yourself,

and
your Virtue will be genuine.

Cultivate it in the home,

and
its Virtue will overflow.

Cultivate it in the village,

and
the village will endure.

Cultivate it in the realm,

and the realm will flourish.

Cultivate it in the world,

and Virtue will be universal.

Accordingly,

One will be judged by the Man of the Way;

Homes will be viewed through the Home of the Way;

And the Village shall measure the village;

And the Realm, for all realms, shall be standard;

And the World, to this world, shall be heaven.

How do I know the world is like this?

By this.

He who is good at building cannot be shaken,

And he who is good at holding can lose nothing.

(According to the principle,) he can enjoy the sacrifice for posterity forever.

His "De" can be pure and true by carrying out the principle in his person;

His "De" can be abundant by carrying it out in his family;

His "De" can lead by carrying it out in the neighbourhood;

His "De" can be powerful by carrying it out in the state;

His "De" can be universal by carrying it out in the kingdom;

So (we should) His "De" can be abundant by carrying it out in his family;

Know a person in the perspective of a person,

Know a family in the perspective of a family,

Know a neighbourhood in the perspective of a neighbourhood,

Know a state in the perspective of a state,

Know the kingdom in the perspective of a kingdom.

How do I know the situation of all the things under Heaven?

By the method mentioned above.

The well-founded will not be pulled up.

The well-embraced will not get dropped.

Such a one's descendants, accordingly, will never let sacrifices to him cease.

If you cultivate it within your own person, your virtue will be authentic.

If you cultivate it within your family, your virtue will exceed all need.

If you cultivate it within your village, your virtue will endure.

If you cultivate it within your state, your virtue will be abundant.

If you cultivate it among all under Heaven, your virtue will reach everywhere.

Look at the person from the point of view of the person.

Look at the family from the point of view of the family.

Look at the village from the point of view of the village.

Look at the state from the point of view of the state.

Look at all under Heaven from the point of view of all under Heaven.

How do I know that all under Heaven is so?

It is by this.

1. What is firmly set up can't be pulled down;

2. What is firmly embraced cannot slip free.

3. And your sons and grandsons, as a result, will sacrifice without end.

4.
When you cultivate it in your person, your virtue will then be genuine;

5. When you cultivate it in your family, your virtue will then be overflow;

6. When you cultivate it in your village, your virtue will then be long lasting;

7. When you cultivate it in your state, your virtue will then be abundant;

8. And when you cultivate it throughout the world, your virtue will then be
widespread.

9.
Use the individual to examine the individual;

10. Use the family to examine the family;

[10a Use the village to examine the village;]

11. Use the state to examine the state;

12. And use the world to examine the world;

13. How do I know that the world is so?

14. By this.

Tao's power
is so deeply entrenched

it can never be uprooted.

Tao's power clings so tightly

it can never slip away.

It will endure for generations.

If you get in
touch

with the power of Tao,

it will become real.

If your family gets in touch

with the power of Tao,

the power will flourish.

If your community
gets in touch

with the power of Tao,

the power will grow even stronger.

If your country gets in touch

with the power of Tao,

the power will become abundant.

If the world
gets in touch

with the power of Tao,

the power will be everywhere.

How can I know
this?

I just do.

.

Power

What is well established cannot be uprooted.

What is firmly held cannot slip away.

The power of sacrifice continues on

from generation to generation.

Cultivated in the person, power becomes real.

Cultivated in the family, power becomes abundant.

Cultivated in the community, power endures.

Cultivated in the nation, power flourishes.

Cultivated in the world, power becomes universal.

Therefore see the person as a person,

the family as a family, the community as a community,

the nation as a nation, and the world as universal.

How do I know that the world is like this?

By this.

One who is rooted in Tao will not be uprooted.

One who is led by Tao will not be misled.

Those who come after him will praise him.

Obey the Tao within you and your Teh your virtue and fitness will increase.

Affirm the Tao in your neighbor and your Teh will promote abundance and cohesion.

Look at the Tao in your community and your Teh will increase harmony and togetherness.

See Tao in your country and your Teh will bring about prosperity and unity.

Advance Tao in the world and your Teh will serve the unification of mankind.

As Tao should be your model you should be a model for your neighbor.

Thus you help to turn them into a model for the community your community into a model for your country your country into a model for the world.

By what do you recognize that the world is in good shape?

By how far you yourself have advanced how far Tao is a model to you.

The Individual and The World

Lao Tze says,

He who is skillful in establishment shall establish the Tao in his heart so that no one can pluck it.

He who is skillful in enfolding arms shall enfold the Teh in his arms so that no one can take it.

From generation to generation his ancestral sacrifices shall be continued without fail.

When this precept is applied by whomever to instruct himself, his character will be made true;

applied to his neighborhood, his neighborhood will thrive;

applied to the state, his state will find good fortune;

applied to the world, the world will inherit with good traditions.

In this way he can observe the others in comparison with the self;

observe others' families in comparison with his own family;

observe others' neighborhoods in comparison with his own neighborhood;

observe others' states in comparison with his own state;

observe the world before in comparison with what it is now.

How do I know that this effect is sure to hold all in the world?

By observation.

CULTIVATING INSIGHT

That
which is firmly rooted,

is not easily torn from the ground;

just as that which is firmly grasped,

does not slip easily from the hand.

The
virtue of the Tao is real,

if cultivated in oneself;

when loved in the family, it abounds;

when throughout the village, it will grow;

and in the nation, be abundant.

When it is real universally,

virtue is in all people.

All
things are microcosms of the Tao;

the world a microcosmic universe,

the nation a microcosm of the world,

the village a microcosmic nation;

the family a village in microcosmic view,

and the body a microcosm of one's own family;

from single cell to galaxy.

Whoever is planted in the Tao

will not be rooted up.

Whoever embraces the Tao

will not slip away.

Her name will be held in honor

from generation to generation.

Let the Tao be present in your life

and you will become genuine.

Let it be present in your family

and your family will flourish.

Let it be present in your country

and your country will be an example

to all countries in the world.

Let it be present in the universe

and the universe will sing.

How do I know this is true?

By looking inside myself.

What is perfectly planted will not be uprooted.

What is perfectly held will not slip away.

Through generations the family's memorial service will not be discontinued.

Thus,

by cultivating Dao in a person, virtues become manifest;

by cultivating Dao in a family, virtues become abundant;

by cultivating Dao in the community, virtues become enduring;

by cultivating Dao in a country, virtues become flourishing;

and by cultivating Dao in the world, virtues become universal.

Thus,

by taking care of one's self, one takes care of others;

by taking care of one's family, one takes care of others' families;

by taking care of one's own community, one takes care of others' communities;

by taking care of one's own country, one takes care of others' countries;

and by taking care of the world, one takes care of the universe.

How do we know in what way the world should be ruled?

Through this.

What is well-built is not pulled down.

What is well-fastened is not separated.

Sons and grandsons worship unceasingly.

Cultivate the self, and the Action is pure.

Cultivate the family, the Action is plentiful.

Cultivate the community, the Action endures.

Cultivate the nation, the Action is fruitful.

Cultivate the world, the Action is all-pervading.

Treat the self by the standard of self.

Treat the family by the standard of family.

Treat the community by the standard of community.

Treat the nation by the standard of nation.

Treat the world by the standard of world.

How do I know how the world is such?

Thus.

LIV

When
the foundation is laid well, and the mortar sound

The house will stand long

And your descendents will honor your memory

Cultivate
virtue in yourself - see yourself - so it will be genuine

Cultivate it in your family - see your family - so it will spread

Cultivate it in your village - see your village - so it will have roots

Cultivate it in your nation - see your nation - so it will be abundant

Cultivate it in the world - see the world - so there will be nothing else

How
do I know the world works this way?

There is no how, I listen, and I know

Good Construction Does Not Fall Down

Good construction does not fall down,

a good embrace does not let go;

their heirs honor them unceasingly.

Cultivate it in yourself, and that virtue is real;

cultivate it in the home, and that virtue is abundant;

cultivate it in the locality, and that virtue lasts;

cultivate it in the nation, and that virtue is rich;

cultivate it in the world, and that virtue is universal.

So observe yourself by yourself,

observe the home by the home,

observe the locality by the locality,

observe the nation by the nation,

observe the world by the world.

How do I know the world is as it is?

By this.

What is established cannot be uprooted.

What is well held cannot slip.

Likewise, descendents will continue to perform traditional rituals.

Cultivating oneself, Te is genuine.

Cultivating the family, Te is plentiful.

Cultivating the village, Te is long lasting.

Cultivating the kingdom, Te is prevailing.

Cultivating the world, Te is ubiquitous.

Therefore, observe all individuals through one individual.

Observe all families through one family.

Observe all villages through one village.

Observe all kingdoms through one kingdom.

Observe all worlds through the world.

How do I know the world is so?

By using the above observation(s).

What is well planted cannot be uprooted.

What is well embraced cannot slip away.

The descendants will carry on the ancestral sacrifice from generation to generation.

Cultivate Virtue in your own person, and it will be genuine.

Cultivate it in the family, and it will be more than sufficient.

Cultivate it in the village, and it will last long.

Cultivate it in the state, and it will flourish abundantly.

Cultivate it in the world, and it will become universal.

Hence, a person must be perceived as person; a family as family; a village as village; a state as state; the world as world.

How do I know about the world?

It is through this.

Firmly established cannot be uprooted.

Firmly grasped will not slip away.

These are handed down from generation to generation.

Virtue cultivated by yourself, is real for yourself.

Practiced in the family, it will abound.

Cultivated in the village, the Virtue will grow.

Cultivated in the nation, it will be abundant.

Cultivate in the universe, the Virtue will be everywhere.

Therefore, study selves with self,

study families with family,

study villages with village,

study nations with nation,

look at the universe with the world.

How do I know about the universe.

With the above.

What is well rooted cannot be pulled up.

What is firmly grasped will not slip loose.

It will be honored from generatlon to generation.

When
cultivated in your person, Virtue will be real.

When cultivated in your household, Virtue will be plentiful.

When cultivated in your village, Virtue will endure.

When cultivated in your country, Virtue will abound.

When cultivated in your world, Virtue will be universal.

Hence,
through yourself look at Self.

Through your household look at Household.

Through your community look at Community.

Through yonr country look at Country.

Through your world look at World.

How
do I know that the world is like this?

Because of what is within me.

What
is well planted cannot be pulled up

what is well held cannot slip away

a good family will live on for generations.

Follow the way and free yourself of the meaningless

follow it in your home and prosper

follow it in your town and be secure

follow it in your nation and flourish

follow it in the world and expand your horizons.

Within
you is the basis for the perfect home

in your own home is the basis for the perfect town

in your town is the basis for perfect nation

in your nation is the basis for perfect world

in our own world is the basis for the perfect universe.

How
do I know all this?

By what is inside me.

Well planted can hardly be plucked. Who is well established (in dao) can hardly
be pulled away. The firmly grounded is hardly easily shaken.

Who has a firm grasp doesn't easily let go. Who has a firm grasp of dao can't
be separated from it. A really firm grasp can't be relaxed.

Next,
the ancestor's dao ways and means and their powers unite to carry the modern
family on. From generation to generation firmly gripped dao [gyrations] shall
be continued without fail. Such ancestral sacrifice is not to be suspended.

When one cultivates firm grasp or well modified ancestor disciplines in one's
own life, things tend to go markedly well: If you cultivate, elevate and apply
well blended, ad hoc modified ancestor ways and means, jobs, routines, accomplishments,
such formerly seen, halfway "inherited" cardinal dao know-how at its best should
be rewarding for yourself as an individual or person at its peak, and if so,
your lifestyle could become suitable, even genuine, and its prowess likewise.

This spells such as: Apply the firm manas grasp to yourself according to "like
father, like son" and you'll incur no manas problem, no such deep, unseen trouble
-

From
this:

Apply such inherited "firmly rooted strategy" and its various grasps to yourself,
and by its id outlets and precious routines you'll be freed from much unsuitable
dross.

Also apply best, united ancestor dao (or sakti) to your family or household
and your household should flourish and thrive by this syncretic way of ways.
[Honour your best father(s) at their best by doing in best footsteps under his
wings, in his shadows - by such as halfway inherited or taken-op proclivities.]

Apply it to the village on a wider, social scale, and the village will be strengthened
or more secure.

Apply it to the kingdom, and the kingdom could prosper.

Apply it to an kingdom, and it will grow.

Cultivated in the world, sour id-based handling sets could become all-embracing.

Therefore:
Delve into how "well structured, planted or formed" some things that are instituted
seem to be.

By delving back through own conscious stages as parts of yourself, you can in
the end contemplate and ridicule yourself a little.

The person should be some family-and-ancestors embedded "thing" in its own right.

Next you can control your household by the united dao controls involved in it
[allied to yin-yang structured cosmology].

According to (such well-planted, relations-structured schooled and trained virtue
of) the individual, evaluate the individual;

According to (the same virtues of) the family, judge the family;

According to (similar blends of virtue of) the village, judge the village;

According to (the virtue of the statutes ) the state, judge the state;

According to (the crossed virtues of) the world, evaluate the world.

How do I know the world? It's from the cultivation of root-strong virtue from
the level of the individual to that of the sour world - I know just by what's
inside me and this, all brought together.

What is firmly established cannot be uprooted;

What is tightly embraced cannot slip away.

Thus sacrificial offerings made by sons and grandsons will never end.

Cultivated in the person, integrity is true.

Cultivated in the family, integrity is ample.

Cultivated in the village, integrity lasts long.

Cultivated in the state, integrity is abundant.

Cultivated everywhere under heaven, integrity is vast.

Observe other persons through your own person.

Observe other families through your own family.

Observe other villages through your own village.

Observe other states through your own state.

Observe all under heaven through all under heaven.

How do I know the nature of all under heaven?

Through this.

He who plants rightly never uproots.

He who lays hold rightly never relinquishes.

His posterity will honour him continually.

Whoever develops the Tao in himself will be rooted in virtue.

Whoever develops the Tao in his family will cause his virtue to spread.

Whoever develops the Tao in his village will increase prosperity.

Whoever develops the Tao in the kingdom will make good fortune prevail.

Whoever develops Tao in the world will make virtue universal.

I observe myself, and so I come to know others.

I observe my family, and all others grow familiar.

I study this world, and others come within my knowledge.

How else should I come to know the laws which govern all things, save thus, that I observe them in myself?

Transforming Power

Your love contains the power

of a thousand suns.

It unfolds as naturally and effortlessly

as does a flower,

and graces the world with its blooming.

Its beauty radiates a transforming energy

that enlivens all who see it.

Because of you, compassion and joy

are added to the world.

That is why the stars sing together

because of your love.

The world will never know love, respect,

kindness and tolerance

until you experience them

in the safety of your love.

When you do,

it will.

He who is well established (in Tao) cannot be pulled away. He who has a
firm grasp (of Tao) cannot be separated from it. Thus from generation
to generation his ancestral sacrifice will never be suspended.

When one cultivates virtue in his person, it becomes genuine virtue.
When one cultivates virtue in his family, it becomes overflowing virtue.
When one cultivates virtue in his community, it becomes lasting virtue.
When one cultivates virtue in his country, it becomes abundant virtue.
When one cultivates virtue in the world, it becomes universal.

Therefore the person should be viewed as a person. The family should
be viewed as a family. The community should be viewed as a community.
The country should be viewed as a country. And the world should be
viewed as the world.

How do I know this to be the case in the world? Through this.

'Since true
foundation cannot fail

But holds as good as new,

Many a worshipful son shall hail

A father who lived true.'

Realized in one man, fitness has its rise;

Realized in a family, fitness multiplies;

Realized in a village, fitness gathers weight;

Realized in a country, fitness becomes great;

Realized in the world, fitness fills the skies.

And thus the fitness of one man

You find in the family he began,

You find in the village that accrued,

You find in the country that ensued,

You find in the world's whole multitude.

How do I know this integrity?

Because it could all begin in me.

The people who are good at building things do not budge,

The people who are good at protecting thing do not lose any part,

So their descendents can celebrate and remember them forever.

If a person can build such a DE, the DE will be real;

If a family can build such a DE, the DE will be plentiful;

If a town can build such a DE, the DE will last long;

If a country can build such a DE, the DE will be bountiful;

If the entire world can build such a DE, the DE will be everywhere.

Therefore, you know others by looking at yourself;

You know other families by looking at your family;

You know other towns by looking at your town;

You know other countries by looking at your country;

You know the past and future by looking at the present.

How do I know everything in the world? This is how.

What is firmly established within cannot be uprooted.

What is firmly embraced within cannot be disengaged.

The Tao, thus firmly established and embraced within you,

Will be respected for generations to come.

Cultivate the Tao in your character,

Then its virtues will be genuine.

Cultivate the Tao in your family,

Then its virtues will abound.

Cultivate the Tao in your community,

Then its virtues will endure.

Cultivate the Tao in your country,

Then its virtues will flourish.

Cultivate the Tao in the world,

Then its virtues will pervade.

Therefore, you can observe the virtues of the Tao,

In your character, if you cultivate it in your character;

In your family, if you cultivate it in your family;

In your community, if you cultivate it in your community;

In your country, if you cultivate it in your country;

And in the world, if you cultivate it in the world.

How can you know how the state of the world is?

Simply by thus observing.

A well-founded establishment cannot be uprooted,

And a well-preserved tradition can not be dissolved:

Each will go on generation after generation.

One has true being when one keeps the Way body and soul,

Effective being when one extends the Way over the family,

Long being when one extends the Way over the community,

Rich being when one extends the Way over a nation,

Universal being when one extends the Way over the world.

Therefore, one knows others by looking at one's self,

Other communities by looking at one's own community,

Other states through the comparison with one's own state

And other worlds by inferring from one's own world.

That's how I come to know the world.

What is skillfully rooted and well established cannot effortlessly be uprooted, what is well embraced cannot be easily torn away.

Hold onto the Tao firmly, and you will endure. This will pass on to your children and grandchildren also.

When virtue is cultivated in oneself, it becomes real.

When cultivated in the home, virtue will overflow.

When virtue is cultivated in the community it becomes lasting.

When cultivated in the nation, virtue becomes abundant.

When virtue is cultivated in the world, it becomes the Law of the land, and it leads to universal virtue, all pervading and all encompassing.

Therefore one can see that ones self influences the family.

The family influences the community. The community influences the nation. And the nation influences the world.

Therefore, bring virtue into your own life, and it will spread all about you, into the world.

How do I know this is true? Because I have seen virtue move and live.

