===== Chapter 32 =====

The Tao is always without renown.

Although it is "simple" and "small"

The world is altogether unable to subjugate it.

Lords and kings, if they could maintain it—

The ten-thousand things would submit themselves.

Heaven and Earth with each other would combine

Thereby raining down sweet dew.

No humans command them, and they are naturally equitable.

At the beginning establishment, there existed names.

Names also since then existed.

One should also know [when] to stop [naming].

Knowing [when] to stop, one can thereby be in no danger.

Simile:

The living presence of the Tao in the world

Is like unto valley streams

Going into larger rivers

And the sea.

Tao endures without a name. Though simple and slight, No one under heaven can master it.

If kings and lords could posses it, All beings would become their guests.

Heaven and earth together Would drip sweet dew Equally on all people Without regulation.

Begin to make order and names arise. Names lead to more names - And to knowing when to stop.

Tao's presence in this world Is like valley streams Flowing into rivers and seas.

Tao is invariably nameless.

Simple like uncut wood, it seems insignificant

Yet no one in the world can command it.

If kings and lords could follow it

The myriad things would salute them,

Heaven and earth would unite

And soft dew would fall,

People would live in harmony

Without any need for laws.

Begin to cut, begin to rule

And names will appear.

When names abound dividing must stop.

The Tao of the world is like rivers flowing into the sea.

THE UNCARVED BLOCK

The Tao, eternal and nameless,

Is as an uncarved block -

Seemingly simple and insignificant,

Is inferior to nothing under the heavens.

If leaders were to embrace it within their own true natures,

Loyalty would come to them as effortlessly as

heaven and earth send the rains and dew.

There being no compulsion,

All would be in harmony.

Carving the block creates identity.

Identity causes names.

Names cause differentiation and distinction -

Harmony ceases.

Thus,

As names are perceived -

As distinctions among people arise -

Stop!

Knowing when to stop, danger may be avoided.

Tao in the affairs of the world is as natural as the rivers seeking the seas.

The Tao is eternal and not named.

Even though simple and subtle, no one in Heaven below (the sacred body) can rule over it!

When all people can sustain it, ten-thousand things (everything) will naturally honor it as they would honor a guest.

Heaven and Earth are mutually joined and drip with sweet dew.

The people are without laws and are naturally in harmony.

When rules began, their names emerged.

From their names, exhaustion emerged.

The master will recognize that in which the mind rests, and knows that when the mind rests there is no danger.

They compare this to the Tao's presence in Heaven below.

It resembles the valley streams that become the great rivers that flow into the sea.

THE WISDOM OF THE

The All-Tao hath no name.

It
is That Minute Point yet the whole world dare not contend

against him that hath it. Did a lord or king gain it and guard it, all

men would obey him of their own accord.

Heaven
and Earth combining under its spell, shed forth dew, extending

throughout all things of its own accord, without man's interference.

Tao,
in its phase of action, hath a name. Then men can comprehend it;

when they do this, there is no more risk of wrong or ill-success.

As
the great rivers and the oceans are to the valley streams, so is the

Tao to the whole universe.

The Tao, considered as unchanging, has no name. Though in its primordialsimplicity it may be small, the whole world dares not deal with (one embodying)it as a minister. If a feudal prince or the king could guard and hold it,all would spontaneously submit themselves to him. Heaven and Earth (underits guidance) unite together and send down the sweet dew, which, withoutthe directions of men, reaches equally everywhere as of its own accord.As soon as it proceeds to action, it has a name. When it once has thatname, (men) can know to rest in it. When they know to rest in it, theycan be free from all risk of failure and error. The relation of the Taoto all the world is like that of the great rivers and seas to the streamsfrom the valleys.

The Unspeakable is eternal and is not to be spoken of in words

Just like a rough piece of wood, it's not useful to anyone

If leaders were an example of true living

Everyone would join his true nature at the same time

The heavens would dew and the clouds rain justice

And without human intervening

That altogether would benefit every single thing that lives beneath the firmament

But when discord is born

Everything must have a name

Keep in mind that when everything has a name,

You'll have to stop all that

Because one who stops will bounce off danger

Compared to the twisted tributaries of mistake

The straight and simple road is like a powerful stream

Nature is always indeterminable. Although, in its original simplicity, it may appear to be helpless, no one else can tell it what to do.

If legislators and administrators could keep this in mind, everybody would obey their laws without enforcement.

When opposites supplement each other, everything is harmonious. Without compulsion, each supports the other.

But when boundaries between opposites appear, then the boundary lines are marked out. Once one begins to differentiate between one thing and another, how will we know where to stop? To know when to stop making distinctions is to be free from error.

The true relationship of every determinate thing to Nature is reintegrative, like all the rivers and rivulets ever running to their ocean.

Tao is eternal, but has no fame (name);

The Uncarved Block, though seemingly of small account,

Is greater than anything that is under heaven.

If kings and barons would but possess themselves of it,

The ten thousand creatures would flock to do them homage;

Heaven-and-earth would conspire

To send Sweet Dew,

Without law or compulsion, men would dwell in harmony.

Once the block is carved, there will be names,

And so soon as there are names,

Know that it is time to stop.

Only by knowing when it is time to stop can danger be avoided.

To Tao all under heaven will come

As streams and torrents flow into a great river or sea.

Tao is the uncarved block.

Timeless, undefined, infinitesimally subtle.

None is its master.

If lords and princes observed it,

the ten thousand things would arrive as guests to the table.

Heaven and earth would rejoice

and sweet nectar would fall,

though none under heaven had decreed it.

When the whole is divided the parts are named.

There are already too many names.

It is time to stop.

Knowing when to stop avoids exhaustion.

Tao in the world is like

stream flowing to river flowing to sea.

The way is continuous, without description

The original nature may be ordinary

But none in the world presumes to master it all

If leaders & sovereigns were able to grasp this

The myriad beings would then submit naturally

(As) heaven and earth join together

Thus to let fall the sweet dew

Nobody has commanded this,

yet the harmony is natural

Begin with rules & definitions appear

And still more definitions are already assumed

Now, more than ever, prepare to learn restraint

Learning restraint is apt to be useful in avoiding trouble

Imagine the place of the path in nature

To be like the streams and valleys

reaching for rivers and ocean

Shape

The Tao is forever undefined.

Though it seems small in its natural state,

No one in the world dares to treat it as a subject.

If kings and lords werer able to maintain it,

The ten thousand things would submit to them on their own.

And Heaven Earth would unite to send forth sweet dew.

By nature it would fall equally on all things,

With no one among the people ordering that it be so.

As soon as we start to establish a system,we have names.

And as soon as there are set names,

Then you must also know when it is time to stop.

By knowing to stop - in this way you averts trouble.

The presence of Tao in the world

is like the relationship of smal valley streams

to rivers and seas.

The primal eternal Tao is an unnameable simplicity. Though small, there is nothing under all of heaven that can subjugate it.

If a leader abides by it, all beings are naturally drawn to him.

Heaven and earth come together in harmony and sweet rain falls everywhere. People cooperate voluntarily, without any instruction.

Tao in the world is like streams flowing into the sea.

The Cosmic Whole, in all its breadth,

Surpasses its name.

Its crystalline simplicity

Is so inexpressibly minute

That no human mind can grasp it.

If only political leaders and corporate barons

Could apprehend its nature,

Then the complementarity of limitless beings

Would effortlessly arise and endure.

In such loving attraction live earth and sky:

As when blessed rain falls soft upon the earth,

Mankind and Nature could unite like lovers-

Free of law, free of command,

People would finally be at peace.

Through names are things distinguished,

And through names can they be exhausted.

The outcome depends on balance:

Feeling where the word is true,

And when it has reached its limit.

Correct approach comes from the center.

In balance, too, is Tao expressed

In the life of our world:

The stream extends to the river,

The river extends to the sea,

The sea extends to the ocean,

The ocean extends to the world.

And the world extends to the Tao.

Tao is absolute, nameless.

A piece of wood, uncarved, natural,

cannot be used by anyone.

The leaders who can be genuine and natural as this,

gain the respect of the people.

The
heavens and the earth join and gentle rains fall,

beyond anyone's command, to everyone equally.

When
civilization grew, names began.

With names, one should know where to stop.

Whoever knows this has security.

In
the world Tao is like rain

that falls into the rivers

and thence to the open sea.

Tao – the Eternally Nameless.

Though primordial simplicity is infinitesimal, none dare make it a public servant.

Were princes and monarchs able to maintain it, all creation would spontaneously submit.

Heaven and earth harmonized, there would be an abundance of nourishing agencies; the people unbidden, would cooperate of their own accord.

Names arose when differentiation commenced; once there were names it became important to know where to stop. This being known, danger ceased.

The Tao spread throughout the world, may be compared to mountain rivulets and streams flowing toward the sea.

When for the first time applied to function, it was named. In as much as names are given, one should also know where to stop. Knowing where to stop one can become imperishable.

Tao was always nameless.

A Natural Guide.

Guide by treating nameless uncarved wood as constant.

Although small,

none in the social world can treat it as vassal.

If fief-holding kings could embrace it,

all the natural kinds would come to self conformity.

Heaven and earth mutually coalesce to rain down sweet dew.

The people, no one ordering them, self balance.

To begin to restrain you have names.

As soon as you have names then,

in general, you must also come to know to stop.

If you know to stop, you can avoid danger.

Compare this guide's being in the social world

to the relation of brook valleys to rivers and oceans.

Tao is real, yet unnameable.

It is original non-differentiation and invisible.

Nevertheless, nothing in the universe can dominate it.

If rulers and lords were able to abide with it, all things in the universe would yield to them naturally.

Heaven and earth are unified and rain the dew of peace.

Without being ordered to do so, people become harmonious by themselves.

When discrimination begins, names arise.

After names arise, one should know where to abide.

When one knows where to abide, one is never exhausted.

To abide with Tao in the world is to be the same as mountain streams flowing to the rivers and to the sea.

The Tao has no name, like an uncarved block.

But no one under Heaven dares claim its allegiance.

Should lords and princes be able to hold fast to it,

the myriad creatures will submit to their own accord.

Heaven and Earth will unite and the sweet dewdrop will fall.

People will live in peace, even though no one is seeking for it.

When the block is carved it will be named.

It will also be time to stop.

Knowing to stop in time avoids danger.

The Tao runs under Heaven as the river and the water of the valley run into the sea.

The Tao is constant and nameless.

The unhewn log, though tiny,

None under heaven dare subjugate.

If marquises and kings can adhere to it,

The ten thousand things will submit to them spontaneously.

When heaven and earth integrate

To drip sweet dew,

Without anyone ordering them,

It is evenly distributed spontaneously.

With the first cutting,

Names emerged.

Names having emerged,

One should also know where to stop.

Knowing where to stop

Will thereby exempt one from peril.

The Tao's relation to all under heaven

Is like small valley streams

To a river or an ocean.

The Tao was always nameless.

When it was expressed for the first time,

It was given a name.

And once it has already been given a name, it is necessary to stop.

The knowledge of where to stop makes a person immune to any danger.

The way is for ever nameless.

Though the uncarved block is small

No one in the world dare claim its allegiance.

Should lords and princes be able to hold fast to it

The myriad creatures will submit of their own accord,

Heaven and earth will unite and sweet dew will fall,

And the people will be equitable, though no one so decrees.

Only when it is cut are there names.

As soon as there are names

One ought to know that it is time to stop.

Knowing when to stop one can be free from danger.

The
way is to the world as the River and the Sea are to rivulets and streams.

The Virtue of Holiness

Reason, in its eternal aspect, is unnamable.

Although its simplicity seems insignificant, the whole world does not dare to suppress it. If princes and kings could keep it, the ten thousand things would of themselves pay homage. Heaven and earth would unite in dripping sweet dew, and the people with no one to command them would of themselves be righteous.

As soon as Reason creates order, it becomes namable. Whenever the namable in its turn acquires existence, one learns to know when to stop. By knowing when to stop, one avoids danger.

To illustrate Reason's relation to the world we compare it to streams and creeks in their course towards rivers and the ocean.

The Tao is not big, but it contains all. If a father could follow the Tao, the children will be naturally compliant. Everything will be in perfect accord, and life will be sweet. If you create laws, you create lawlessness. If you trust the people the law will be written on their hearts. When you name something, you create division. Institutions are created to serve a common purpose. When the purpose is served they are no longer needed. Know when to stop to avoid conflicts. Everything flows into the Tao, as all rivers flow into the ocean.

Direction frequently needs no name.

It is simple.

It is small.

Still, it submits to nothing in the world.

Were a Duke or a Prince to embrace Direction,

myriad matters would submit on own volition.

With the cosmos and the earth in harmony, sweet dew accrues.

It self-regulates without the need of intervention.

As the system begins, names are assigned.

When names are assigned, know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop averts danger.

Direction in relation to people of the world is like the sea to rivers.

Way is perennially nameless,

an uncarved simplicity.

Though small,

it's subject to nothing in all beneath heaven.

But when lords or emperors foster it,

the ten thousand things gladly become their guests,

heaven mingling with earth sends down sweet dew,

and the people free of mandates share justice among themselves.

When a governing blade begins carving it up, names arise.

Once names arise,

know that it's time to stop.

Knowing when to stop, you can avoid danger.

Way flowing through all beneath heaven:

it's like valley streams flowing into rivers and seas.

Tao is eternal and nameless.

Even though its singular building block is tiny,

None in the world can master over it.

If kings and barons keep faith in it,

All things spontaneously follow order.

When Heaven and Earth joined to make sweet dew,

It is evenly spread without the people's command.

Initiating regulations produces names.

Since names already proliferate, one must also know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop can avoid over regulation.

Tao to the world is like streams in valleys to the rivers and sea.

The
tao entirely lacks a name

Although its true nature is tiny

Noone in the world is able to methodize it either.

If
nobles and kings are able to keep to it

The 10000 things attain self-spontaneity

The heavens and earth join with each other and it rains sweet
dew

It is the command of noone but people cooperate.

Once
measuring begins names are present

Names are also grasped and possessed

In the end the knowledge of stopping also follows

With knowledge of stopping lack of danger can happen.

Analogically,
tao being in the world

Is just like how the streams and valleys relate to rivers and seas.

The Principle has no name of its own. It is nature. This nature so unmanifest is stronger than anything.

If princes and emperors were to conform themselves to it, all beings would collaborate with them spontaneously;

heaven and earth would act in perfect harmony, sprinkling a sweet dew (the best possible omen); the people would be governable without the need for constraint.

The Principle is, with reference to the diversity of beings in the world, like the mass of great rivers and oceans with reference to trickles and rivulets of water.

The Tao, eternally nameless

Its simplicity, although imperceptible

Cannot be treated by the world as subservient

If a sovereign can hold on to it

All will follow by themselves

The heaven and earth, together harmoniously

Will rain sweet dew

People won't need to force it, it will adjust by itself

In the beginning of creation, there were names

Names came to exist everywhere

One should know when to stop

Knowing when to stop, thus avoiding danger

The existence of the Tao in the world

Is like streams in the valley into rivers and the ocean

Rough Draft of notes

The Tao is always nameless.

And even though a sapling might be small

No one can make it be his subject.

If rulers could embody this principle

The myriad things would follow on their own.

Heaven and Earth would be in perfect accord

And rain sweet dew.

People, unable to deal with It on its own terms

Make adjustments;

And so you have the beginning of division into names.

Since there are already plenty of names

You should know where to stop.

Knowing where to stop, you can avoid danger.

The Tao's existence in the world

Is like valley streams running into the rivers and seas.

Tao- the Eternally Nameless.

Though primordial simplicity is infinitesimal, none dare make it a public servant.

Were princes and monarchs able to maintain it, all creation would spontaneously submit.

Heaven and earth harmonized, there would be an abundance of nourishing agencies; the people unbidden, would cooperate of their own accord.

Names arose when differentiation commenced; once there were names it became

important to know where to stop. This being known, danger ceased.

The Tao spread throughout the world, may be compared to mountain rivulets and streams flowing toward the sea.

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF HOLINESS

Tao in its eternal aspect is unnamable. Its simplicity appears insignificant, but the whole world cannot control it. If princes and kings employ it every one of themselves will pay willing homage. Heaven and Earth by it are harmoniously combined and drop sweet dew. People will have no need of rulers, because of themselves they will be righteous.

As soon as Tao expresses itself in orderly creation then it becomes comprehensible. When one recognizes the presence of Tao he understands where to stop. Knowing where to stop he is free from danger.

To illustrate the nature of Tao's place in the universe: Tao is like the brooks and streams in their relation to the great rivers and the ocean.

Tao everlasting (ch'ang) is the nameless uncarved wood (p'u).

Though small,

Nothing under heaven can subjugate it (mo neng ch'en).

If kings and barons can abide by (shou) it,

All creatures will arrive as guests (pin) to a banquet.

Heaven and earth unite,

To send down the sweet rain.

Without being commanded by the people (mo chih ling),

It falls evenly (chün) by itself.

At the beginning of institution names come to be.

Once there are names,

One must know when to stop (chih chih).

One who knows when to stop does not become exhausted (pu tai).

Tao in the world is like

Valley streams flowing into rivers and seas.

Tao is absolute, nameless. A piece of wood, uncarved, natural, cannot be used by anyone. The leaders who can be as genuine and natural as this gain the respect of the people.

The heavens and the earth join and gentle rains fall, beyond anyone's command, to everyone equally.

When civilization grew, names began. With names, one should know where to stop. Whoever knows this has security.

In the world Tao is like rain that falls into the rivers and thence to the open sea.

The Tao cannot be named or defined.

It is invisible, but it contains all things.

If rulers could master it, then everything would fall into place.

Heaven and Earth would be united.

A sweet rain would fall.

People would be just without regulation.

However, when people seek to rule, they divide the whole

and begin assigning names to things.

And now, there are names upon names. Too many!

The naming must stop.

Knowing when to stop saves us from danger.

Tao in the world is like rivers flowing into the sea.

Thirty-two

The Tao is forever undefined.

Small though it is in the unformed state, it cannot be grasped.

If kings and lords could harness it,

The ten thousand things would come together

And gentle rain fall.

Men would need no more instruction and all things would take their course.

Once the whole is divided, the parts need names.

There are already enough names.

One must know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop averts trouble.

Tao in the world is like a river flowing home to the sea.

The Tao is nameless for ever.

Though it is very small,

It is subject to no one in the world.

If lords and kings can keep it,

They can bring all things in the world under subjection.

When the Yin and Yang between heaven and earth unite,

Sweet dew will fall, so equally scattered down

Without any interference on the part of the people.

The administration of the empire demands names;

Names are once given,

Limitations are thereby known.

The knowledge of limitations helps avoid danger.

The Tao is to the world what the river and the sea

Are to the countless streamlets.

Tao is forever nameless.

Though the uncarved block is small,

No one under Heaven can make it his subject.

If kings and princes hold fast to it,

The ten thousand things will submit of their own accord;

Heaven and Earth will unite to send sweet dew;

The people will be fair of themselves, without being ordered.

When the cutting begins, names come to be.

As soon as names appear,

Know that it's time to stop.

By knowing this, you will be free from danger.

To draw an analogy, the working of Tao under Heaven

Is like streams and rapids flowing into great rivers and seas.

Dao is often referred to as "the nameless".

Although this "pristine simplicity" (Dao) appears to be insignificant,

Nothing in the world can subjugate it.

If a ruler can follow the way of Dao,

Everyone will naturally come to join him.

When Yin and Yang harmonise, rain begins to fall.

Similarly, people will live in harmony without any coercion.

Whenever a system is set up, new terminology appears.

(A new system will bring about new disputes.)

However, it is important to simplify the system.

Knowing when to stop, you can avert a calamity.

What Dao is to the people is similar to what the ocean is to the rivers.

Holy Virtue

Sheng Teh

Tao is eternal and has no name.

Though P'u (Simplicity) may appear puny,

Yet the world dare not dominate it.

If kings and nobles can preserve it intact,

The ten thousand things will gladly pay them homage.

Heaven and Earth unite in harmony

To pour down showers of sweet dew,

To benefit all mankind graciously and evenly.

Institutions once begun, names come into being.

Names having come into being,

One should know where to rest.

To know where to rest is to forestall peril.

Tao differentiated in the world (will return to One),

Like streams and rivers flowing to the sea.

The Never-changing Tao has no name.

It may appear, so simple is it, of small account,

Yet the whole world would not venture to subdue it.

If kings and princes were possessed of it,

Homage would be gladly paid to them by all the people in the world.

Heaven-and-Earth would sweeten them with the gentle dew.

The people, unconstrained by commands, would live in harmony.

That which functions, however, is named.

When naming starts, see that you know where to stop.

If you know where to stop, danger cannot touch you.

As the brooks and the streams flow into and become the rivers and seas,

So everything in the world flows into and is made one with the Tao.

Tao is always without a name,

Simple and small.

Beneath-heaven dares no subject it.

If kings and barons can hold to it,

The ten thousand things will pay homage.

Heaven and earth will mutually join

And sweet dew will fall.

Not by law but of themselves

The people will stay in balance.

When law and order arose,

Names appeared.

Aren't there enough already?

Is it not time to stop?

To know when to stop

Is to be free from danger.

Tao is to all beneath heaven

As rivers and seas are to rivulets and streams.

The universal subtle essence is unnameable and omnipresent.

Although it appears even in the plainest and most ordinary of things,

it is inferior to nothing.

It maintains itself as a model of indivisible integrity.

If people would embrace it as their own true nature,

everything would settle down in right order and peace of its own accord.

Harmonious relationship can be illustrated by the cycle of the seasons which produces rain and dew at exactly the right times.

People do not need to do anything to insure the harmony between Heaven and Earth.

All names were given for the purpose of distinction when the original simplicity was diversified.

When one departs from simplicity, the result is perplexity.

When one returns to simplicity, one is saved from destruction by confusion.

The universal subtle essence is to human beings what the great ocean is to the rivers and streams of the earth.

XXXII.

Intuitive
Virtue

The eternal
Tao is nameless; though it be

Too
insignificant a name to have,

In
its primordial simplicity

The
whole world dare not make of it a slave.

If
prince or king could keep it, everything

Would
homage pay to him spontaneously,

And
Heaven and Earth, combined, sweet dews would bring,

And
people know no rule but harmony.

But
when it takes control, it has a name,

And,
knowing when to stop, men rest at ease,

For
to the Tao the whole world is the same

s
river streams
compared with mighty seas.

The Name of Inner Life is Everlasting Tao.

If only he is pure, though he may be small,

The Servant of Tao dares to stand against the world.

Tao is able to maintain the unity of prince and people;

It subdues and binds all beings with each other;

It united Heaven and Earth harmoniously to produce sweet dew;

It gathers the people in the bonds of time and individuality.

The Name produces, divides, and brings to life;

Things produced ever return into the name.

The Master also shall know how to rest in it.

Knowing how to rest in it means that he never will decay.

On the earth everywhere Tao exists,

As the waters are collected in the valleys

And return into the rivers and the seas.

Tao
(the Laws of the Universe) is always nameless.

Small
as it is in its First Simplicity,

It
is less than nothing in the world.

If
only a leader could stick to it, Everything will give respect

to
them.

Heaven
and Earth

will
be harmonized

And
send down sweet dew.

Peace
and order

will
reign among the people

Without
any command from above.

When
once

the
Primal Simplicity broke up,

(at
the Time of the Big Bang,)

Different
names appeared.

Are
there not enough names now?

Is
this not the time to stop?

To
know where to stop is to preserve ourselves from danger.

The
Tao (the Laws of the Universe) is to the world

what
a great river or an ocean is to the streams and brooks.

The
Tao is manifest into a shape, but then the shape is lost.

Do
not be rigid about shapes, but only about ability to change.

The Way has the simplicity of the nameless. As soon as it is carved, there are names.

Since the names also exist, the Saint will now where to abide. He who knows where to abide, may be without peril.

The relation of the Way to All-under-heaven may be compared to that of torrents and valleys to the River and the sea.

The Tao, considered as unchanging, has no name.

Though
in its primordial simplicity it may be small, the whole

world dares not deal with (one embodying) it as a minister. If a

feudal prince or the king could guard and hold it, all would

spontaneously submit themselves to him.

Heaven
and Earth (under its guidance) unite together and send down

the sweet dew, which, without the directions of men, reaches equally

everywhere as of its own accord.

As
soon as it proceeds to action, it has a name. When it once has

that name, (men) can know to rest in it. When they know to rest in

it, they can be free from all risk of failure and error.

The
relation of the Tao to all the world is like that of the great

rivers and seas to the streams from the valleys.

THOU art eternally nameless.
Because
the un-hewn log is small, none care to subjugate it.
If Kings and rulers
had it, the masses would gladly serve them.
Heaven
and Earth unite to bring-forth sweet dew.
Without 'governing' the people,
natural equality ensues.
As
soon as one carves-up Nature, 'labels' arise.
Once there are labels, one
should know that it is time to STOP.
Knowing when to stop, one may avoid
peril.
In
Totemic terms, the relationship of the universe to THOU
is 'Valley Streams
flowing back into the River and the Sea.'

Awareness
is not limited

It's like an uncarved block of wood

With infinite potential

Beyond all usefulness for good

If
leaders could stay centered

In awareness pure and plain

This world would be as nourishing

As nature's gentle rain

Everyone
would be at peace

And always living in the whole

Opposition and division

Could never take their toll

TAO is always nameless.

Small as it is in its Primal Simplicity,

It is inferior to nothing in the world.

If only a ruler could cling to it,

Everything will render homage to him.

Heaven and Earth will be harmonized

And send down sweet dew.

Peace and order will reign among the people

Without any command from above.

When once the Primal Simplicity diversified,

Different names appeared.

Are there not enough names now?

Is this not the time to stop?

To know when to stop is to preserve ourselves from danger.

The Tao is to the world what a great river or an ocean is to the streams and brooks.

The Tao is forever nameless, formless and shapeless.

Being so, it is like the uncarved wooden block; its value is not easily perceived.

No King can make the wooden block His subject;

yet if the King and the people were to embody the Tao,

the Earth would be like a paradise, all would live in harmony, and the equilibrium would flow without surcease.

But man cannot let the block sit; they divide it and number each piece, carving it and naming the functions.

Know when to stop the carving and naming, this will prevent you from carving into perilous territory.

Do not force the carving; let the functions of the Tao flow of their own accord as the rivers of the Earth flow to the sea.

The Tao is nameless and unchanging.

Although it appears insignificant,

nothing in the world can contain it.

If
a ruler abides by its principles,

then her people will willingly follow.

Heaven would then reign on earth,

like sweet rain falling on paradise.

People would have no need for laws,

because the law would be written on their hearts.

Naming
is a necessity for order,

but naming can not order all things.

Naming often makes things impersonal,

so we should know when naming should end.

Knowing when to stop naming,

you can avoid the pitfall it brings.

All
things end in the Tao

just as the small streams and the largest rivers

flow through valleys to the sea.

Tao cannot be defined. One can only say that it is the single principle responsible for every event or thing.

When the leader has regard for this principle, and for no lesser theories, the group members trust the leader. Because the leader pays equal attention to everything that happens, there are no prejudices to divide the group into faction. There is unity.

Because the group work is grounded in an obvious and natural righteousness, rules and regulations are not needed to make people behave.

Even though the single principle cannot be defined, it is possible to explain what is happening in a group. We speak of gestalt formation, of polarities, of flows and blocks, of interventions that either hinder or facilitate, and so on.

But too much theoretical talk distracts the group from what is happening, from the process itself. Talking about process is one way to block process and lower the energy of the group field.

When that happens, the wise leader returns once again to an awareness of what is happening and to the single principle that lies behind what is happening.

In the long run, focusing on this single principle is the most potent aspect of leadership. From this unity, we learn how things happen.

The Tao will always be beyond comprehension.

Although it seems trivial

No one in All the world can contro it.

If governments and leaders can abide in it

All beings shal gratefully behave likewise.

We would have a Heaven on Earth

And sweet rains would fall.

The people would not need to be told, They would just naturally do

what is right.

When you organize, you must of necessity use names and order.

But given that, you must also know where to leave off

naming and structuring.

Knowing when to stop, you can avoid danger.

All the World is to the Tao

As rivers flowing home to the sea.

Infinity
can never be defined in words.

Smaller than an atom, greater than forever,

it can never be comprehended.

If
kings would stay centered in the Infinite,

they would not try to control the

uncontrollable;

Heaven
and earth would be seen as a manifestation

of the oneness of Infinity,

as harmonious as dew accumulating on the

ground.

The
people would recognize Infinity manifesting

in their king and all things would be

in harmony.

When
the whole is distinguished into parts,

and parts into more parts

and more parts into even more parts

a myriad names are required.

There
are already too many distinctions and

names.

The
naming of things focuses on the manifestations

of Infinity

and too much distinguishing can result in one

becoming confused in the manifestations and

oblivious to

the oneness of all things.

Refuse
to distinguish the components of the whole.

See the oneness of Infinity,

and see the earth as a manifestation

disintegrating back into Infinity.

Tao has always been nameless;

an Uncarved Block, simple and small, but subject to none under Heaven.

All things will obey the Monarch who defends it.

Heaven uniting with Earth, as sweet dew falling.

People not commanded, but true to themselves.

First there were names, then more names.

It is time to stop.

Knowing when to stop avoids exhaustion.

Tao flows from Heaven, as Rivers flow into the Sea.

Tao is eternally nameless.

Although, as an uncarved block,1 it is small,

None under Heaven can subjugate it.

If kings and lords could take possession of it,

Of their own accord the Ten Thousand Things would pay them homage.

Heaven and Earth would come together,

And sweet rain fall.

Peace and order would spread among the people

Without its being decreed.

When the block is cut, the parts need names.

Are there not already enough names?

One should know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop, one avoids all danger.

Tao in the world is like a river flowing to the sea.

1. i.e. as a very simple, undifferentiated thing.

The eternal Way has no name.

The earliest simplicity has no significance,

But its function is supreme.

If kings and officials can keep the Way,

The whole world will become their guest.

Harmony between heaven and earth creates rains and dews,

Which all share equally without laws or rules.

With the growth of the earliest system,

There appeared names, which are therefore conventional.

Knowing what is conventional,

One can also understand where and when to stop.

Knowing where and when to stop,

One will never meet with countering forces.

The Way is to the world what rivers are to the ocean.

Tao will always be nameless, an Uncarved Block although it is a thing of no account, no one in the world can make it his subject.

If the princes and kings could watch over It, the thousands of things would on their own be as deferential as guests.

Heaven and Earth would join together to send sweet dew. The people on their own would share equally without anyone giving orders.

A comparison: Tao's presence in the world is like the relation of small river valleys to the Yang-tze and the ocean.

Tao is eternal and has no human appearance.

Though Tao is a tender Being no one in the whole world can subjugate It.

If the nobility and rulers of the country lived in harmony with Tao — the common people would be peaceful and calm. The sky and earth then would unite in harmony; the prosperity and wellbeing would come; the people would quiet without orders!

For the sake of establishing the order in the country, the laws are created. Yet the laws should not be too severe.

Tao is like the ocean. The ocean is lower than all rivers, yet all rivers flow into it.

The Tao Way is too subtle to be defined.

In manifestation only has a name.

When
a Leader is on the Tao Way

Is honestly followed by people,

Thus peace will be in the kingdom.

The
Wise Person following Tao knows own limits

He who knows own limits is on the Tao Way.

Tao does everything, all creatures return in Tao,

The Wise Person knowing this applies Tao in everything he does.

The
Dao is always nameless. Although the Uncarved Block is insignificant, nothing
in the world can subordinate it. If the lords and kings can hold fast to it,
then the myriad creatures will come to be their vassals of their own accord.

Heaven
and Earth will couple in order to let the sweet dew fall. Although no people
shall so command, the [distribution of sweet dew] will be equitable of its own
accord.

Only
after fabrication occurs are there names, and once there are names people ought
to know where to stop, for by knowing where to stop they can escape danger.

For
example, the Dao in relation to the world is like the way the streams and valleys
supply [water to] the rivers and oceans.

Tao is constantly nameless.

Though the unhewn wood is small,

No one in the world dares to subjugate it.

If dukes and kings can keep it,

All things will become guests by themselves.

Heaven and earth conjugate in dropping sweet dew;

People without being ordered are fair to each other.

In the beginning of creation, all were given names.

Having names, they know their limits.

Knowing their limits keeps them from danger.

Thus Tao is to the world

As brooks and valleys are to rivers and seas.

The Limits of Specialization

The Tao of the Absolute has no name.

Although infinitesimal in its Simplicity,

The world cannot master it.

If leaders would hold on to it,

All Things would naturally follow.

Heaven and Earth would unite to rain Sweet Dew,

And people would naturally cooperate without commands.

Names emerge when institutions begin.

When names emerge, know likewise to stop.

To know when to stop is to be free of danger.

The presence of the Tao in the world

Is like the valley streawm joining the rivers and seas.

Look into a microscope and the Dao is there. Look into the sky and it is filled with the Dao. Do not label what is in the lens. Do not label what is above. All waters will flow into the sea, so why think more on it?

The Way eternal has no name.

A block of wood untooled, though small,

May still excel the world.

And if the king and nobles could

Retain its potency for good,

Then everything would freely give

Allegiance to their rule.

The
earth and sky would then conspire

To bring the sweet dew down;

And evenly it would be given

To folk without constraining power.

Creatures
came to be with order's birth,

And once they had appeared,

Came also knowledge of repose,

And with that was security.

In
this world,

Compare those of the Way

To torrents that flow

Into river and sea.

Tao has no name forever.

Though the simplicity seems small, it may be subordinated to nothing under Heaven.

If kings and princes can preserve it, all creatures would submit of themselves to them.

(Yin and Yang between) Heaven and Earth unite to drip sweet dew.

Without the command of the people, it drips evenly over all.

Once there was government, there were names appearing.

Once there were names, one has to know where and when to stop.

By practicing moderation one can be free from danger.

Everything under Heaven is embraced by Tao, just like every river or stream running into the sea.

The Dao in its constancy is "nameless."

Although the uncarved block is small, none under Heaven can make it his servitor [chen], but, if any lord or prince could hold on to it, the myriad folk would submit spontaneously.

As when Heaven and Earth unite to send down sweet dew, though not one of the people are ordered to do so, they live in harmony of their own accord.

When the cutting of it starts, names come into existence.

Once names exist, one should know to stop.

It is by knowing to stop that danger can be avoided.

As an analogy, the relationship between the Dao and all under Heaven is similar to the way streams and tributaries respond to the river and the sea.

1. The Dao is constantly nameless.

2. Though in its natural state it seems small, no one in the world dares to
treat it as a subject.

3. Were marquises and kings able to maintain it,

4. The ten thousand things would submit to them on their own,

5. And Heaven and Earth would unite to send forth sweet dew.

6. By nature it would fall equally on all things, with no one among the people
ordering that it be so.

7.
As soon as we start to establish a system, we have names.

8. And as soon as there are set names,

9. Then you must also know that it's time to stop.

10. By knowing to stop—in this way you'll come to no harm.

11. The Way's presence in the world

12. Is like the relationship of small valley [streams] to rivers and seas.

Tao is an eternal
mystery,

so small you can never take hold of it.

If a leader
gets right with Tao,

people will follow him on instinct.

All will be right with the world.

People will do the right thing without being told.

Everything that
comes from Tao needs a name.

But once everything has its name,

you should make no other distinction between things.

This prevents you from being trapped by them.

Everything in
the universe is full of Tao and leads to Tao,

just as the water in rivers flows into oceans.

The Natural Way

The Way is absolute and undefined.

Like natural uncarved wood in simplicity,

yet none in the world can overcome it.

If leaders would hold to it,

the whole world would serve them spontaneously.

Heaven and earth join, and gentle rain falls,

beyond the command of anyone, evenly upon all.

When civilization arose, names began.

With names, one should know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop, frees one from danger.

The Way in the world is like

rivers and streams flowing into the sea.

TAO the ONE has no name.

Onefold He is the One in all cause of all motion and manifoldness of the All.

When the leaders are one with Him the people trust and follow them heaven and earth visibly bless their acts and without creating Right they are making men righteous.

When the Onefold unfolds He can be named.

Name, however, is a thing and a limitation and holds the unfolding back.

Yet one who pauses holding on to the One in his heart finds his was to the Absolute to the One in all to the TAO like brooks and rivers to the sea of completion.

Tao Is Like The Sea

Lao Tze says,

The Tao is not designated as a certain type.

The pristine simplicity is just a small display of the Tao.

Though it is small, whoever in exercise of this method, will make no man in the world daring to treat him as a servant.

If the duke or the king knows to exercise this method; all existence will express obedience and loyalty to him.

Heaven and Earth unite and send down sweet dew which without the direction of men, reaches equally everywhere as of its own accord.

As soon as it proceeds to action, it has a way.

When it once has that way, men can know to rest in it.

When they know to rest in it, they can be free from all risk of failure and error.

The relation of the Tao to all the world is like that of great rivers and sea to streams and valleys.

IF THE TAO WERE OBSERVED

The
Tao is eternal, but does not have fame;

like the uncarved block, its worth seems small,

though its value to man is beyond all measure.

Were it definable, it could then be used

to obviate conflict, and the need

to teach the way of the Tao;

all men would abide in the peace of the Tao;

sweet dew would descend to nourish the earth.

When
the Tao is divided,

there is a need for names,

for, like the block which is carved,

its parts then are seen.

By
stopping in time

from torment and conflict,

strife is defeated, and danger averted.

The people then seek the wisdom of Tao,

just as all rivers flow to the great sea.

The Tao can't be perceived.

Smaller than an electron,

it contains uncountable galaxies.

If powerful men and women

could remain centered in the Tao,

all things would be in harmony.

The world would become a paradise.

All people would be at peace,

and the law would be written in their hearts.

When you have names and forms,

know that they are provisional.

When you have institutions,

know where their functions should end.

Knowing when to stop,

you can avoid any danger.

All things end in the Tao

as rivers flow into the sea.

The eternity of Dao has no name:

Even though Pure Matter is infinitely small, its function is so superior that it is next to none,

If rulers can follow the model of nature, everything under the heaven will render homage to them,

Then the people would automatically be equally sufficient without being directed.

It was named after the initiation of regulations, when names were given,

Then one will know how to rest.

To know how to stop will not reach a perilous end.

The application of Dao to the world is like the relation of oceans to rivers.

Tao is eternally nameless.

Though simplicity is small,

The world cannot treat it as subservient.

If lords and rulers can hold on to it,

Everything becomes self-sufficient.

Heaven and earth combine and allow sweet dew.

Without rules, people will naturally become equal.

At the outset, the rule must be expressed.

Once it exists, stop speaking of it.

The result of not speaking of it is to eliminate danger.

In a manner of speaking, Tao is to the world

As the rivers are to oceans and seas.

XXXII

The
tao is ever nameless

Though it naturally seems small, no one would dare to try and capture it

If the leaders of the world could be one with it

All the creatures of the earth would bow down before them

And manna would spring from heaven and earth equally for all

Though no one insisted upon it

Failing
that, of course, things must be named and put in some kind of order

As soon as you start to establish order, however

You must know when it's time to stop, so nothing can go wrong

The great tao flows into the world

As water flows into streams, then rivers, then oceans

There comes a point when it's self-defeating to try and control it

The Way Is Eternally Nameless

The Way is eternally nameless.

Though simplicity is small,

the world cannot subordinate it.

If lords and monarchs can keep to it,

all beings will naturally resort to them.

Heaven and earth combine,

thus showering sweet dew.

No humans command it;

it is even by nature.

Start fashioning, and there are names;

once names also exist,

you should know when to stop.

By knowing when to stop,

you are not endangered.

The Way is to the world

as rivers and oceans to valley streams.

Tao does not have a name and is simple.

It is small, but no one can rule it.

If kings and nobles can follow it, the people themselves would be submissive.

When heaven and earth work together, rain is produced.

Nobody gives the order, it is produced naturally.

When a regulation is initiated, it should have a reason.

When there is a reason, we need to know where to stop.

If we know where to stop, we may avoid failure.

Tao to the world is like the sea to the rivers.

The Way is always nameless.

Small as it is in its uncarved block, it is inferior to nothing in the world.

If only a king or a prince could abide with it, all things in the world will render homage to him.

Heaven and Earth are in harmony and send down sweet dew.

Without being commanded to do so, the people live in peace and order.

When the original diversifies, different names arise.

When names arise, one should know it is time to stop.

To know when to stop is to be free from danger.

The Way is to the world what a great river or an ocean is to the streams and brooks.

The Tao has no name.

Pooh (the pure Tao) is minute, yet no one can grasp (manage) it.

If kings and lords could harness it,

everything would come and obey.

Heaven and earth couple,

gentle rain fall; people needs not to pray for it.

After the rise of civilization, there are names.

Now, enough names,

must know when to stop.

Knowing to stop, eternal again.

Tao to the world is like a river flowing home to the sea.

The Tao is forever nameless.

Though
the Uncarved Block is small,

it is not inferior to anything under heaven.

lf leaders could keep hold of it,

the ten thousand things would submit to them freely.

Heaven and earth would unite and sweet dew would fall.

The people would live in harmony

without any law or decree.

Only
when the Block is carved are there names.

As soon as there are names

it is timc to stop.

Knowing when to stop prevents trouble.

All
under heaven will return to the Tao

as brooks and streams flow home to the sea.

The
Dao is eternal yet has no definition.

Such a minor concept of no great religion,

it is yet larger than everything put together.

If politicians and priests were able to use it

all beings and things would naturally obey,

the earth would heal,

and prosperity would cover the world.

Without laws there would be peace.

But as soon as a distinction is made,

wondering if it is atheist or theist,

and names given to every type of thing and idea,

definitions come in.

As soon as there are definitions ...

stop.

Knowing that enough is enough prevents trouble.

Like the river to the sea,

everything will come

to the person who is in unison with the Dao.

Best dao is absolute and eternal. As such it has neither name nor fame.

Its uncunning, cute naiveté, the fabled raw block of wood, and it cant be used
by anybody. None in the whole world can master and make use of such basic simplicity.
Yet, though seemingly of small value, it could be greater than anything in the
universe.

Good
kings and barons can keep such unspoiled, inborn nature. If kings and barons
would but hold on to it, all beings and things would submit to them well of
their own accord. Yes, the best let heaven and earth join, so that the mystic
sweet rain falls, all the time beyond the command of men, yet evenly upon all.
Let heaven and earth unite to drip sweet dew. And the ten thousand creatures
would flock to honour you; for the world would conspire much for sweet dew:
Without law or compulsion, men would take up regulations and institutions, sort
out names and [try to] live in harmony.

A
human civilisation can rise once there are names [principles].

Once the block is carved, there will be such names; they're wide differentiations
of things. But as soon as there are [principles and neatly differentiated] names,
know that it's time to stop. Its well to know where to stop for calm and poise.
As soon as there are names [and study] it's time to stop.

By
knowing when it's time to stop, much danger could be avoided.

In the world dao can be likened to rivers that turn into wider rivers and eventually
course into some sea. All will come to and be clasped by one and more such dao
rivers -and to [some] dao all under heaven will come, as streams and torrents
flow into a great river or sea [of universal dao].

The Way is eternally nameless.

Though the unhewn log is small,

No one in the world dares subjugate it.

If feudal lords and kings could maintain it,

The myriad creatures would submit of themselves.

Heaven and earth unite to suffuse sweet dew.

Without commanding the people,

equality will naturally ensue.

As soon as one begins to divide things up, there are names;

Once there are names, one should also know when to stop;

Knowing when to stop, one thereby avoids peril.

In metaphorical terms,

The relationship of all under heaven to the Way is like that of valley streams to the river and sea.

Tao the absolute has no name.

But although insignificant in its original simplicity, the world does not presume to bemean it.

If a king could lay hold on it, the world would of itself submit to him.

Heaven and Earth would conspire to nourish him.

The peopole without pressure would peacefully fall into their own places.

If he should dispose them by titles and names, he would be making a name for himself.

Yet he would wisely stop short of the name, and thus avoid the evil of distinctions.

Tao is to the world what the streams and valleys are to the great rivers and seas.

Face Your Fears

Your relationship is not

just one more arrangement

designed to keep you

from facing your fears.

It is the safe and stable ground

upon which you can stand

to face whatever comes.

Do not use your beloved

to hide from yourself.

Shortly after our last move

I developed a massive case of poison oak.

In my misery I became vulnerable

to old feelings of shame and regret.

For several evenings my beloved Nancy sat with me,

as I talked, cried, ranted and raved,

safe enough at last

to be afraid.

Tao is eternal and has no name. Though its simplicity seems insignificant, none in the world can master it.

If kings and barons would hold on to it, all things would submit to the spontaneously.

Heaven and earth unite to drip sweet dew. Without the command of men, its drips evenly over all.

As soon as there were regulations and institutions, there were names.
As soon as there were names, know that it is time to stop. It is by
knowing when to stop that one can be free from danger.

Analogically, Tao in the world may be compared to rivers and streams running into the sea.

Existence is
infinite, not to be defined;

And, though it seem but a bit of wood in your hand, to carve as you please,

It is not to be lightly played with and laid down.

When rulers adhered to the way of life,

They were upheld by natural loyalty:

Heaven and earth were joined and made fertile,

Life was a freshness of rain,

Subject to none,

Free to all.

But men of culture came, with their grades and their distinctions;

And as soon as such differences had been devised

No one knew where to end them,

Though the one who does know the end of all such differences

Is the sound man:

Existence

Might be likened to the course

Of many rivers reaching the one sea.

The DAO has no name, but it is always present.

It is simple and small, but no one can conquer it.

If the kings are able to practice it, everybody will come and obey by themselves.

The heavens and the earth will be in harmony,

And rain will pour down from the sky.

People will take care of themselves without need of the law.

Since there were names, everything got its own place.

People should know when to stop;

If they know when to stop, they can avoid disasters.

The world comes to the DAO like every stream and river comes to the ocean.

The Tao remains eternally unnamable.

As undivided simplicity,

If it resides in an ordinary person,

nobody in the world can subjugate him;

If an influential person abides by it,

everybody in the world will be drawn to him.

When heaven and earth come together in harmony,

Showering the world equally with the sweet rain of undivided simplicity,

People cooperate voluntarily without any governing rules.

When simplicity is divided, names come into existence.

When names are already there, the process of further division should stop,

For to know when to stop

is to avoid the danger of complexity.

The Tao is to the world

what the ocean is to the rivers of the earth.

The eternal Way has no name.

The earliest simplicity has no significance,

But its function is supreme.

If kings and officials can keep the Way,

The whole world will become their guest.

Harmony between heaven and earth creates rains and dews,

Which all share equally without laws or rules.

With the growth of the earliest system,

There appeared names, which are therefore conventional.

Knowing what is conventional,

One can also understand where and when to stop.

Knowing where and when to stop,

One will never meet with countering forces.

The Way is to the world what rivers are to the ocean.

The Tao is forever nameless, formless and shapeless.

Being so, it is like the uncarved wooden block; its value is not easily perceived.

No King can make the wooden block His subject;

yet if the King and the people were to embody the Tao,

the Earth would be like a paradise, all would live in harmony, and the equilibrium would flow without surcease.

But man cannot let the block sit; they divide it and number each piece, carving it and naming the functions.

Know when to stop the carving and naming, this will prevent you from carving into perilous territory.

Do not force the carving; let the functions of the Tao flow of their own accord as the rivers of the Earth flow to the sea.

