===== Chapter 14 =====

Inspect it and you will not see it.

Its name is said to be "The Obscure."

Listen for it and you will not hear it.

Its name is said to be "Becoming Silent."

Roll it around in your hands and you will not obtain it.

Its name is said to be "The Subtle."

Those who are not able to achieve these three ask—

This is the reason they are blended and handled as one:

At its ascending, not bright.

At its descending, not dark.

The measure of measure, it cannot be named.

Repeatedly returning to "no-thing-ness"

It is called "The Form of No-Form"

"The Shape of No-thing-ness."

It is called

"The Indistinct"

"The Unclear"

Greet it and you will not see its face.

Follow it and you will not see its back.

Hold to the Tao of the Ancients

In order to tame the existence of present times.

One can know the ancient beginning.

It is called the "Tao Epoch."

Seeing but not seeing, we call it dim. Listening but not hearing, we
call it faint. Groping but not touching, we call it subtle.

These three cannot be fully grasped. Therefore they become one.

Rising, it is not bright; setting it is not dark. It moves all things back to where there is nothing

Meeting it there is no front, following it there is no back.

Live in the ancient Tao, Master the existing present, Understand the source of all things. This is called the record of Tao.

Look! It cannot be seen;

It's called the obscure.

Listen! It cannot be heard;

It's called the soundless.

Feel it! It cannot be grasped:

It's called the bodiless.

These three defy scrutiny.

Intermingled, they blend into one.

Above it is not bright.

Below it is not dark.

Continuous,

Unceasing,

Unnamable,

Reverting to nothingness.

It's an occurrence of no occurrence.

It is a form that takes no form.

Elusive like a shadow.

Intangible like haze.

Confront it! It has no face.

Follow it! It has no back.

If you grasp the ancient Tao

You can rule the realm of today.

If you know the ancient beginnings

You know the essence of Tao.

THE MYSTICAL TAO

Looking for it, it cannot be seen -

Being formless, it is called Yi, the invisible.

Listening to it, it cannot be heard -

Being soundless, it is called Hsi, the inaudible.

Grasping at it, it cannot be reached -

Being subtle, it is called Wei, the intangible.

These three; imperceptible, indescribable -

Mystically united and elusively perceived

as an undefinable oneness.

As the oneness ascends - no light appears.

As the oneness descends - no darkness is perceived.

Unceasingly, continually, form eluding definition,

Evasively reverting to spirit - to nothingness.

The form of formlessness.

The image of imagelessness.

The oneness remains nameless.

Meeting it, it has no part which is front.

Following it, it has no behind.

Encompassing the ancient Tao,

Present affairs are mastered.

Knowing the primal nature of mankind

and the universe,

Is to know the essence of Tao.

Look for it and you will not see it; its name is called invisible.

Listen for it and it cannot be heard; its name is called soundless.

Try to touch it and you will not be able to grasp it; its name is called formless.

It will do you no good to scrutinize these three.

They merge and become one.

Those above are not light.

Those below are not dark.

An unbroken thread. An unbroken thread that cannot be named.

It again returns to the original state.

It is a shape without a shape.

It is an image without substance.

This is called illusory and inexplicable.

Go toward it and you do not see its face.

Follow it and you do not see its back.

Retain the ancient ways of the Tao in order to take hold of the present.

You have the power to know the Source.

This is called the Tao's unbroken thread.

THE SHEWING-FORTH OF THE MYSTERY

We look at it, and see it not; though it is Omnipresent; and we name it

the Root-Balance. We listen for it, and hear it not, though it is

Omniscient; and we name it the Silence. We feel for it, and touch it not,

though it is Omnipotent; and we name it the Concealed. These three Virtues

hath it, yet we cannot describe it as consisting of them; but, mingling them

aright, we apprehend the One.

Above,
it shineth not; below, it is not dark. It moveth all

continuously, without Expression, returning into Naught. It is the Form

of That which is beyond Form; it is the Image of the Invisible; it is

Change, and Without Limit.

We
confront it, and see not its Face; we pursue it, and its Back is

hidden from us. Ah! but apply the Tao as in old Time to the work of the

present; know it as it was known in the Beginning; follow fervently the

Thread of the Tao.

We search for it yet see it not; it is the invisible. We listen forit, yet hear it not; it is the untouchable. Its trinity is inseparable.We recognize it only as one, innerbound.

Its distance is incomprehensible, its depth can not be fathomed. Eternallycreative, it can not be defined. It goes back to Nothingness. It can becalled: The incomprehensible Mysterious. You walk towards it and find noteven its Beginning. You follow it and there is no End. Who understandsthe Spirit of the old Sages masters his own time, and thru them the veryroot of all time. Such is the continuum of the Spirit.

We look at it but we do not see it and we call it the invisible

We listen to it but don't hear it and we call it the inaudible

We grope at it but never touch it and we call it the untouchable

The invisible, the inaudible and the untouchable come together in one

There is no light when it rises

There is no darkness when it descends

Continuously, constantly, but it cannot be put into words

And it returns to nothing

This is what they call the form of the formless, the image of the invisible

People call it indefinite and impalpable

You won't see it from the front

You won't see it from behind

One who lives after their original conscience, lives in the present

And understands everything that has ever been

That is living according to nature

Since what is ultimate in Nature cannot be seen with one's eyes, it is spoken of as invisible. Since it cannot be heard with one's ears, it is called inaudible. Since it cannot be grasped in one's hands, it is thought of as intangible

But not even all these three together can adequately describe it. Nature did not originate in beginnings, and will not reach its goal in endings. Rather it acts unceasingly, without either absolute beginnings or final endings. If we cannot describe it intelligibly, this is because it is beyond our understanding.

Nature is the formless source of all forms, and yet it remains unaffected by its forms. Thus it appears to us as if mysterious.

No matter how closely we scrutinize its coming toward us, we cannot discover a beginning. No matter how long we pursue it, we never find its end.

One must comprehend the way in which the original Nature itself operates, if he wishes to control present conditions. That is, he should study the ultimate source itself. This is the way to understand how Nature behaves.

Because the eye gazes but can catch no glimpse of it,

It is called elusive.

Because the ear listens but cannot hear it,

It is called the rarefied.

Because the hand feels for it but cannot find it,

It is called the infinitesimal.

These three, because they cannot be further scrutinized,

Blend into one,

Its rising brings no light;

Its sinking, no darkness.

Endless the series of things without name

On the way back to where there is nothing.

They are called shapeless shapes;

Forms without form;

Are called vague semblance.

Go towards them, and you can see no front;

Go after them, and you see no rear.

Yet by seizing on the Way that was

You can ride the things that are now.

For to know what once there was, in the Beginning,

This is called the essence of the Way.

Searching, we cannot see it.

We call it ephemeral.

Straining, we cannot hear it.

We call it ethereal.

Reaching, we cannot grasp it.

We call it intangible.

These three are often confused

because they are the same.

The One is not bright above and dark below.

Transparent, it moves in and out of nothing.

Its form has no shape.

Its image has no substance.

It is indistinct, elusive.

Nothing to face, nothing to follow.

Hold to the timeless Tao.

Abide in the present.

Now is the ancient beginning.

Looking for things not seen

Descriptions will tell of "the invisible"

Listening for things not heard

Descriptions will tell of "the inaudible"

Reaching for things not grasped

Descriptions will tell of "the intangible"

These three do not allow complete investigation

And so are confused and considered as one

What height is not bright

What depth is not dark

An unbroken continuity does not permit description -

A return home to non existence

And so this is called the form of the formless

The image of nothingness

It is called elusive & obscure

When it is met its head is not seen

When it is followed its end is not seen

To grasp the path of the ancients

Is the way to master present existence

The capacity to comprehend the ancient beginnings

May be called the clue* to the way

The continuity of Tao

We look at it, but do not see it;

We name this "the minute."

We listen to it, but do not hear it;

We name this "the rarified."

We touch it, but do not hold it;

We name this "the level and smooth."

These three cannot be examined to the limit.

Thus they are merged as one.

One - there is nothing more encompassing above it,

and nothing smaller below it.

Boundless, formless! It cannot be named,

and returns to the state of no-thing.

This is called the formless form,

The substanceless image.

This is called the subtle and indistinct.

Follow it and you won't see it back;

Greet it and you won't see its head.

Hold on to the Way of the present -

To manage the things of the present,

And know the ancient beginning.

This is called the beginning of the thread of Tao

Looked at but not seen, listened to but not heard, grasped for but not held, formless, soundless, intangible:

the Tao resists analysis and defies comprehension.

Its rising is not about light, its setting not a matter of darkness. Unnameable, unending, emerging continually, and continually pouring back into nothingness,

It is formless form, unseeable image, elusive, evasive unimaginable mystery. Confront it, and you won't see its face. Follow it and you can't find an end.

Perceive its ancient subtle heart, however, and you become master of the moment. Know what came before time, and the beginning of wisdom is yours.

Look for it-it is invisible;

Listen for it-it is silent;

Try to grasp it-it is not solid.

Its nature is bodiless,

Yet it is the essence of body.

Its darkness is the source of light,

Its infinitude, the ground of time.

It is the Formless One

From which all forms arise.

Pursue, and it eludes you;

Follow, and it vanishes.

Thought cannot hold it,

But you can't think without it.

It is the thread of all being,

The origin, the pulse of time.

It is the wave upon the strand of life:

Pervading, defining, nourishing.

Looked for it cannot be seen; it is invisible.

Listened for it cannot be heard; it is inaudible.

Reached for it cannot be touched; it is intangible.

These three are beyond analysis; these three are one.

It
rises like the sun, but does not illuminate.

It sets like the sun, but does not darken.

Without beginning, without end,

it is infinite, undefinable.

It
is the form of the formless;

it is existence in non-existence;

it is the greatest mystery.

Meet it and it has no face;

follow it and it has no back.

Hold
close to the ancient Tao

and be master of your present existence.

Knowing the present you mirror the past.

This is the clue to Tao.

Looked for but invisible – it may be named "colourless."

Listened for, but inaudible – it may be named "elusive."

Clutched at, but unattainable - is may be named "subtle."

These three cannot be unraveled by questioning for they blend into one.

Neither brighter above , nor darker below.

Its line, though continuous, is nameless, and in that it reverts to vacuity.

It may be styled "The form of the formless"; "The Images of the imageless"; in a word – "The indefinite."

Go in front of it and you will discover no beginning; follow after it and you will perceive no ending.

Lay hold of this ancient doctrine; apply it in controlling the things of the present day, you will then

understand how from the first it has been the origin of everything.

Here, indeed, is the clue to the Tao.

That which we look at and cannot see is called plainness. That which we listen to and cannot hear is called rareness. That which we grope for and cannot get is called minuteness.

These three cannot be closely examined; So they blend into One.

Revealed, it is not dazzling; Hidden, it is not dark. Infinite, it cannot be defined. It goes back to non-existence.

It is called the form of the formless, And the image of non~existence. it is called mystery. Meet it, you cannot see its face; Follow it, you cannot see its back.

By adhering to the Tao of the past You will master the existence of the present And be able to know the origin of the past. This is called the clue of Tao.

Metaphysical Issues

Look at it and fail to see: its name is 'remote.'

Listen to it and fail to hear: its name is 'diffuse.'

Feel it and fail to get anything: its name is 'subtle.'

This threesome cannot be exhaustively probed for portents.

Hence we blend them and deem them as one.

Its height is not sparkling.

Its depth is not murky.

String-like, it cannot be named.

It reverts to being no natural kind.

This we call the condition of being in no condition; the sign of no natural
kind.

This we call 'confused' and 'indistinct.'

Facing it you cannot see its head; Following it you cannot see its rear

If you grasp guiding discourse from ancient times in dealing with today's reality

you can know the ancient beginnings.

This is called a guiding discourse's record.

Gaze at it; there is nothing to see.

It is called the formless.

Heed it; there is nothing to hear.

It is called the soundless.

Grasp it; there is nothing to hold on to.

It is called the immaterial.

We cannot inquire into these three,

Hence, they interfuse into one.

Above, it is not light.

Below, it is not dark.

Invisible, it cannot be called by any name.

It returns again to nothingness.

Thus, we call it the form of the formless

The image of the imageless.

It is the evasive.

Approach it; you cannot see its face.

Go after it; you cannot see its back.

Adhere to the Tao of the remote past,

And apply it to the present.

This will enable you to understand the primordial beginning.

This is the essential Tao.

That which cannot be seen is called invisible.

That which cannot be heard is called inaudible.

That which cannot be held is called intangible.

These three cannot be defined, therefore they are merged as one.

Look at its highest part - it is not bright.

Look at its lowest part - it is not dark.

It never ends and it cannot be named.

It returns to nothingness.

Therefore it is called the shape without shape and the substance without substance.

It is called indefinable.

One approaches it but cannot see its beginning.

One follows it but cannot see its end.

Hold fast to the original path in order to control the realm of the present.

To know the ancient origin is the discipline of Tao.

Looking at it, you do not see it -

This is called "invisible";

Listening to it, you do not hear it -

This is called "inaudible";

Trying to touch it, you do not feel it -

This is called "intangible."

These three, which defy thorough inquiry,

Long ago merged into One.

One is something

Whose past is not remote,

Whose future, not transient.

Continuous and unending,

It is unnameable,

And again reverts to nothingness.

This may be called the formless form,

The immaterial image.

This is called faint and dim:

Following it, you do not see its tail;

Meeting it, you do not see its head.

Hold on to the present Tao

To govern the present realm,

Whereby you know its primeval origin.

This is called the Tao's thread-head.

What we look at and do not see is called simplicity.

What we listen to and do not hear is called rarity.

What we clasp and do not catch is called delicateness.

These three cannot be discerned,

So they unite to become one.

When it is revealed, it does not dazzle,

When it is concealed, it is not dark,

When it is infinite, it is not defined.

It attains the non-existent.

Its name is the form of the formless

And its image is that which does not have an image.

It is mysterious.

Meet it, and you will not be able to see its face,

Follow it, and you will not be able to see its back.

By adhering to the ancient Tao,

You will be master of the essence of the present

And you will be aware of the origin of the past.

That is the clue to the Tao.

What cannot be seen is called evanescent;

What cannot be heard is called rarefied;

What cannot be touched is called minute.

These
three cannot be fathomed

And so they are confused and looked upon as one.

Its
upper part is not dazzling;

Its lower part is not obscure.

Dimly visible, it cannot be named

And returns to that which is without substance.

This is called the shape that has no shape,

The image that is without substance.

This is called indistinct and shadowy.

Go up to it and you will not see its head;

Follow behind it and you will not see its rear.

Hold
fast to the way of antiquity

In order to keep in control the realm of today.

The ability to know the beginning of antiquity

Is called the thread running through the way.

Praising the Mysterious

We look at Reason and do not see it; its name is Colorless. We listen to Reason and do not hear it; its name is Soundless. We grope for Reason and do not grasp it; its name is Bodiless.

These three things cannot further be analyzed. Thus they are combined and conceived as a unity which on its surface is not clear and in its depth not obscure.

Forever and aye Reason remains unnamable, and again and again it returns home to non-existence.

This is called the form of the formless, the image of the imageless. This is called the transcendentally abstruse.

In front its beginning is not seen. In the rear its end is not seen.

By holding fast to the Reason of the ancients, the present is mastered and the origin of the past understood. This is called Reason's clue.

The Tao cannot be seen, so don't look for it. You can't hear it, so don't listen for it. It is no-thing, so don't try to touch it. Timeless and dimensionless, it cannot be named. But all things are contained in it. Subtle beyond understanding. It is a beginningless and endless present. Not trying to find it, you can be it. Look, here you are!

Looking at it, it cannot be seen - label it invisible,

Listening to it, it cannot be heard - label it inaudible,

Holding onto it, it cannot be held - label it intangible.

All three are beyond comprehension; they are One.

Looking up, it is dim.

Looking down, it is dark.

It lacks clarity,

it defies a name;

it returns to Null.

This is formless form, this is imageless image.

This is elusiveness.

Confronting it, one cannot see its head;

Following it, one cannot see its tail.

Seize Direction of the past - this is to manage the Ull of the present.

Know it from the beginning - this is to understand the Direction's rhythm.

Looked at but never seen, it takes the name invisible.

Listened to but never heard, it takes the name ethereal.

Held tight but never felt, it takes the name gossamer.

You can't unravel these three

blurred so utterly they've become one,

rising without radiance and setting without darkness,

braided together beyond name, woven back always and forever into nothing:

this is called formless form or nothing's image, called spectral confusion,

something you meet without seeing a front and follow without seeing a back.

Abiding in the ancient Way

to master what has now come to be

and fathom its ancient source:

this is called thread of the Way.

Looking at without seeing it, it is invisible;

Listening to without hearing it, it is inaudible;

Holding onto without finding it, it is intangible;

These three need no further inquiry, they are thus merged into the One:

It is not bright above, nor dark below,

Boundless beyond description, and reverting back to nothingness.

It is a shape without form, an image without substance, and

A blurred ambiguity.

Facing it, one sees no head, and following it, one sees no back.

Holding fast the Tao of old,

For the understanding of current discoveries,

One may learn the beginning of Creation.

This is called the principle of Tao.

Being
observed, lacking sight

Say the name smooth

Being listened to, lacking hearing

Say the name rare

Being pounced on, lacking obtainment

Say the name small.

That
which these three describes cannot be resolved

So they mingle yet act as one.

What
is high lacks brightness

What is low lacks darkness

Restrictions and restraints cannot be named

Return, merge with, relate to the absence of things.

It
is an appropriate action to call it

The absence of being shape's shape

The absence of being thing's form.

It
is appropriately called ungraspable, elusive

Moving toward it there is no seeing a head

Following it there is no seeing a tail.

Holding
the tao of the ancients

Warding off presence of the now happens

The ability to know the ancient beginnings

Is appropriately called a bond to tao.

Looking, one does not see it, for it is invisible. Listening, one does not hear it, for it is silent. Touching, one does not feel it, for it is impalpable.

These three attributes must not be separated, for they designate one and the same being.

This being, the Principle, is not light above and dark below, as are opaque material bodies. Like a slender thread, it unwinds itself (as continuous existence and action). It has no name of its own. It goes back as far as the time when there were no other beings but itself.

It has no parts; from in front one sees no head, from behind no rear.

It is this primordial Principle that has ruled, and rules, all beings right up to the present. Everything that has been, or is, since the ancient origin, is from the unwinding of the Principle.

Look at it, it cannot be seen

It is called colorless

Listen to it, it cannot be heard

It is called noiseless

Reach for it, it cannot be held

It is called formless

These three cannot be completely unraveled

So they are combined into one

Above it, not bright

Below it, not dark

Continuing endlessly, cannot be named

It returns back into nothingness

Thus it is called the form of the formless

The image of the imageless

This is called enigmatic

Confront it, its front cannot be seen

Follow it, its back cannot be seen

Wield the Tao of the ancients

To manage the existence of today

One can know the ancient beginning

It is called the Tao axiom

The Tao is not a material object, therefore it cannot be seen or touched. We say it is invisible and colorless because it is without form or substance.

Sound also cannot be seen or touched. But unlike sound, the Tao cannot be heard. It cannot be detected by any of our physical senses, because it is metaphysical in nature.

These characteristics above must be always be true. None of them stands alone without the others. Together, they are central to the concept of the Tao.

Since the Tao isn't a visible thing, it is neither bright nor dark. It is immaterial, and yet it gives all material things solid reality. This is why we say it is the image of the imageless, and the form of the formless.

The Tao is infinite in extent, not only in itself, but also in its function, as the endless source of all things. It has no beginning and no end, therefore we cannot see the front or the back of it. "Front" and "back" are concepts that do that apply to something so utterly beyond limits.

The Tao has always been and always will be. It held true for the ancients just as it holds true today. Therefore, we can take the principles that the ancient sages uncovered and apply them in living our lives today. These principles are as relevant in our modern world as they were when they were first envisioned.

From this, we get our underlying assumption in studying the Tao. We take advantage of the work that has already been done, so we don't have to reinvent the wheel. We stand on the shoulders of giants from the ancient beginnings of the Tao in order to see further. This is the most basic axiom - the foundation in our work to build a better understand of spirituality.

IN PRAISE OF THE PROFOUND

It is unseen because it is colorless; it is unheard because it is soundless; when seeking to grasp it, it eludes one, because it is incorporeal.

Because of these qualities it cannot be examined, and yet they form an essential unity. Superficially it appears abstruse, but in its depths it is not obscure. It has been nameless forever! It appears and then disappears. It is what is known as the form of the formless, the image of the imageless. It is called the transcendental, its face (or destiny) cannot be seen in front, or its back (or origin) behind.

But by holding fast to the Tao of the ancients, the wise man may understand the present, because he knows the origin of the past. This is the clue to the Tao.

What is looked at but not (pu) seen,

Is named the extremely dim (yi).

What is listened to but not heard,

Is named the extremely faint (hsi).

What is grabbed but not caught,

Is named the extremely small (wei).

These three cannot be comprehended,

Thus they blend into one.

As to the one, its coming up is not light,

Its going down is not darkness.

Unceasing, unnameable,

Again it reverts to nothing.

Therefore it is called the formless form,

The image (hsiang) of nothing.

Therefore it is said to be illusive and evasive (hu-huang).

Come toward it one does not see its head,

Follow behind it one does not see its rear.

Holding on to the Tao of old (ku chih tao),

So as to steer in the world of now (chin chih yu).

To be able to know the beginning of old,

It is to know the thread of Tao.

Looked for it cannot be seen; it is invisible. Listened for it cannot be heard; it is inaudible. Reached for it cannot be touched; it is intangible. These three are beyond analysis; these three are one.

It rises, like the sun, but does not illuminate; it sets, like the sun, but does not darken. Without beginning, without end, infinite, indefinable. It is the form of the formless; it is existence in non-existence; it is the greatest mystery. Meet it and it has no face; follow it and it has no back.

Hold close to the ancient Tao and be master of your present existence. Knowing the present you mirror the past. This is the clue to Tao.

Look, but you can't see it.

Listen, but you can't hear it.

Reach out, but you can't touch it.

Invisible, inaudible, intangible.

Elusive.

The One.

When it rises, no light.

When it sets, no darkness.

It calls all things back into nothingness [No–Thing–Ness].

Formless form, imageless image.

No front, no back.

Live in the Tao of old, master the present.

Know the Source: The essence of Tao.

Fourteen

Look, it cannot be seen - it is beyond form.

Listen, it cannot be heard - it is beyond sound.

Grasp, it cannot be held - it is intangible.

These three are indefinable;

Therefore they are joined in one.

From above it is not bright;

From below it is not dark:

An unbroken thread beyond description.

It returns to nothingness.

The form of the formless,

The image of the imageless,

It is called indefinable and beyond imagination.

Stand
before it and there is no beginning.

Follow it and there is no end.

Stay with the ancient Tao,

Move with the present.

Knowing
the ancient beginning is the essence of Tao.

What cannot be seen is called "Yi" (without colour);

What cannot be heard is called "Xi" (without sound);

What cannot be touched is called "Wei" (without shape);

These three things can be in no way defined,

So they are combined into one.

Above it there is no light;

Below it there is no darkness;

So vague as to defy any description.

It is categorized as the Nothingness,

And is called the shape without shape as well as the image without substance.

It is hence named as "huhuang" (vague and dimly visible).

Facing it, you cannot see its front;

Following it, you cannot see its back.

To control the present Being (substance) by employing the Tao of ancient time,

One knows the beginning of the universe.

And this is called the law of the Tao.

You look at it but don't see it.

So you name it the Invisible.

You listen to it but don't hear it.

So you name it the Inaudible.

You grasp at it but don't touch it.

So you name it the Intangible.

These three

Are beyond scrutiny.

Therefore, blend them into one.

No brightness above it,

No darkness below it -

Boundless, it cannot be named.

Return to the objectless object.

It is called the shapeless shape -

The formless form.

It is called the vague and dim.

You meet it but don't see its head.

You follow it but don't see its back.

Hold on to the Tao of old,

And thereby ride the being of now.

Know the old beginning,

Which is called the thread of Tao.

That which cannot be seen is called Yi.

That which cannot be heard is Xi.

That which cannot be touched is Wei.

All these three qualities can hardly be analysed.

When amalgamated into one,

Its upper limit is not radiant,

And its lower limit is not dull.

It is as nebulous as it is indescribable.

Eventually it approaches to nothingness.

This is why it is called the formless form, or the immaterial material.

This is why it is called the illusory.

Try to meet it head-on, and you cannot see its face.

Try to follow it from behind, and you cannot see its back.

Following the way of ancient Dao,

You will be able to manage your affairs with great aplomb.

To be able to understand ancient Dao

Is to truly appreciate the immutable principles of Dao.

In Praise of the Mysteries

Tsan Hsuan

What is invisible when looked at is called yi;

What is inaudible when listened to is called hsi;

What is elusive when grabbed at is called wei.

These three are not amenable to investigation;

Therefore, they mingle as One.

On rising, the One does not become bright;

On falling, it does not become dark.

Unnameable it goes on and on,

And again reverts to Non-Being.

This is called shape of the shapeless,

And form of the formless.

This is called winking-waning, as in a dream.

On greeting it, one cannot see its front;

On following it, one cannot see its back.

Taking hold of the Tao of antiquity

To cope with the problems of the present

Could make one know the ancient origins.

This is called the unbroken strand of Tao.

That object upon which you gaze yet do not see is called the Invisible;

That sound to which you listen but do not hear is called the Inaudible;

That thing for which your hand gropes yet fails to touch is calledthe Intangible.

The scruting of these three imponderables cannot be carried further: the mind perceives them blend in One.

This Unity seen from above does not shine,

Nor, seen from below, is it dark.

It goes back through Time in an unbroken chain of countless links

Till it reaches Non-Existence.

It is the Formless Form, the Image of the Unimaginable.

It is the Incrutable.

Advance towards it, and it shows no front;

Follow it, and it shows no front;

Follow it, and it shows no back.

Yet by laying hold of this Ancient Truth you can master your present existence.

For to understand the mystery of the Beginning

Is to hold the key to the Tao.

Look at it; you can't see it:

Call it shapeless.

Listen to it: you can't hear it:

Call it soundless.

Grasp at it; you can't hold it:

Call it bodiless.

These three are beyond scrutiny;

Therefore they blend into one.

Its upped side it not bright,

Its lower side is not dark.

Continually the can't-be-named goes on

And comes back to nothingness.

Call it the formless form,

The imageless image,

The obscure.

From in front, you don't see its head.

From behind, you don't see its back.

But hold onto the Tao of old

And you can handle today's nowness.

Knowing the primal is the key to Tao.

Look at it, but you cannot see it.

Because it is formless, you call it invisible.

Listen to it, but you cannot hear it.

Because it is soundless, you call it inaudible.

Grasp it, but it is beyond your reach.

Because it is subtle, you call it intangible.

These three are indescribable and imperceptible,

but in the mystical moment you see it, hear it and grasp it,

the Unseen, Unheard and Unreachable presents itself as the indefinable essence.

Confront it, and you do not see its face.

Follow it, and you do not see its back.

It does not appear bright when viewed at the zenith,

nor does it appear dark when viewed at the nadir.

There is nothing that can make this subtle essence of the universe distinct.

When you try to make it clear to yourself, it evasively reverts to Nothingness.

You may call it the Form of the Formless or the Image of the Imageless.

Yet the elusive, subtle essence remains nameless.

If you hope to meet it,

it has no part you can call front.

If you hope to follow it,

it has no place you can call behind.

Yet it can be observed in the constant regularity of the universe.

The constancy of the universe of antiquity is the constancy of the present time.

If one knows the Primal Beginning, one may thus know the truth of the universal subtle Way.

XIV.

Making
Clear the Mystery

What
we cannot see by looking is the evenness of things,

What we
cannot hear by listening the rare,

What
we cannot seize by grasping is the subtleness that springs

When
we try to scrutinize them and. compare.

Blended
into Unity, above it is not bright,

Below
it is not buried in obscurity,

Ceaseless
in its action, nameless in its flight,

It
returns again to formless immaturity;

The
form of formlessness, the shape of the unseen,

Abstruse
and indeterminate as shadows on a screen

We
meet it front to front and we do not see its face,

We
follow it and do not see its back,

But
who holds its ancient way

Is
the master of to-day,

And
its far-away beginning in the olden time can trace,

Tis the thread of Tao that lies along its
track.

Looking at it, you do not see it, you call it Invisible.

Listening to it, you do not hear it, you call it Inaudible.

Touching it, you do not grasp it, you call it Intangible.

These three cannot be described, but they blend, and are One.

Above, it is not bright;

Below, it is not dim;

Unceasingly, unceasingly,

It cannot be called by a Name,

It enters into Form, and returns into Spirit.

That is why it is called Spiritual Form of Form, Spiritual Image of Image.

That is why it is called vague and indeterminate.

Meet it, you cannot see its beginning;

Follow it, and you cannot see its end.

Consider the Tao of Old in order to arrange affairs of Now.

To be able to know the Life-Spring of Old is to give expression to the Thread of the Tao.

Look
at it

but
you cannot see it!

Its
name is Formless.

Listen
to it

but
you cannot hear it!

Its
name is Soundless

.
Try to hold it

but
you cannot get it!

Its
name is Incorporeal.

These
three attributes

are
to deep to measure;

They
mix together

into
one.

Its
upper side is not bright:

Its
under side is not dim.

Always
the Not Namable

moves
on,

Until
it returns

beyond
the world of things.

We
call it

the
formless Form,

the
imageless Image.

We
call it

the
not describable

and
unimaginable.

Confront
it and

you
do not see its face!

Follow
it and

you
do not see its back!

Yet
equipped with this

timeless
Tao (the Laws of the Universe),

You
can control

present
realities and deal with the past.

To
know the ancient origins

(
the beginning of the Universe ) is

to
know the true Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

Gazing, we do not see it; we call it dim.

Listening, we do not hear it; we call it inaudible.

Groping, we do not grasp it; we call it subtile.

These three (properties) do not allow ultimate scrutiny, for indeed, merging, they become One.

Its rising is not bright, nor is its setting dark. Branching out in shoots innumerable that cannot be defined, it returns again to nothingness.

This may be called giving shape to the shapeless, forming an image out of nothingness; this may be called a vague likeness.

We meet it, but do not see its front; we follow it, but do not see its back.

If, by seizing they Way of antiquity, we direct the existence of to-day, we may know the primordial beginning. This may be called: (unravelling) the clue of the Way.

We look at it, and we do not see it, and we name it 'the

Equable.' We listen to it, and we do not hear it, and we name it 'the

Inaudible.' We try to grasp it, and do not get hold of it, and we

name it 'the Subtle.' With these three qualities, it cannot be made

the subject of description; and hence we blend them together and

obtain The One.

Its
upper part is not bright, and its lower part is not obscure.

Ceaseless in its action, it yet cannot be named, and then it again

returns and becomes nothing. This is called the Form of the Formless,

and the Semblance of the Invisible; this is called the Fleeting and

Indeterminable.

We
meet it and do not see its Front; we follow it, and do not see

its Back. When we can lay hold of the Tao of old to direct the things

of the present day, and are able to know it as it was of old in the

beginning, this is called (unwinding) the clue of Tao.

Look; Id cannot be seen.
It is 'subtle!'
Listen; Libido cannot
be heard.
It is 'unique!'
Reach; Super-Ego cannot be grasped-upon.

It is 'serene.'
These
three are unfathomable;
They are bound together into a Unity.
Concerning
your Unity:
It's height is not 'distant;'
it's depth is not 'blurred.'

Extended infinitely, it merges with NOTHING PERSONAL.
This is "the Form
of the formless:"
the 'business' that is Non-Personal.
This is "Disembodied
Form," or YOUR SPIRITUAL IDENTITY.
Looking
backwards, you cannot see it's beginnings.
Looking forwards, you cannot see
where it leads.
Adhering
to the Business of Today,
managing the actualities of the moment,
you
may comprehend your primeval beginnings.
THIS
IS THE VERY STORY-LINE OF YOUR BEING.

When
you look, it isn't there

Listen and you cannot hear it

It seems to be beyond your reach

Because you are so near it

This
single source of everything

Appears to be an empty image

Though it cannot be understood

You can see its naked visage

Follow
it to nothingness

Approach it where you have no face

From nowhere to infinity

This vacant image leaves no trace

From
never to eternity

This naked face is what you are

An empty, vacant, open door

Forevermore ajar

LOOK at it but you cannot see it!

Its name is Formless.

Listen to it but you cannot hear it!

Its name is Soundless.

Grasp it but you cannot get it!

Its name is Incorporeal.

These three attributes are unfathomable;

Therefore they fuse into one.

Its upper side is not bright:

Its under side not dim.

Continually the Unnameable moves on,

Until it retums beyond the realm of things.

We call it the formless Form, the imageless Image.

We call it the indefinable and unimaginable.

Confront it and you do not see its face!

Follow it and you do not see its back!

Yet, equipped with this timeless Tao,

You can harness present realities.

To know the origins is initiation into the Tao.

Looked at it cannot be seen - it is beyond form; and is seen as remote.

Listened to it cannot be heard - it is beyond sound; it is indistinct.

Reach for it, and you cannot grasp it. It is beyond reach and is ephemeral.

These unknowable things evade definition,

And blend into a single mystery,

called The Tao.

Its top is not bright;

Its bottom is not dark;

faultless, unnamable,

it returns to the realm of nothing.

Thus, it is called the formless form,

The image with nothing to see,

something subtle, beyond all conception.

Draw near it and there is no beginning;

chase after it and there is no end.

By holding to the ancient Tao

You can manage current existence

And know the ancient beginnings.

This is called the very beginning thread of the Tao.

Look for it, and it can't be seen.

Listen for it, and it can't be heard.

Grasp for it, and it can't be caught.

These three cannot be further described,

so we treat them as The One.

Its
highest is not bright.

Its depths are not dark.

Unending, unnamable, it returns to nothingness.

Formless forms, and imageless images,

subtle, beyond all understanding.

Approach
it and you will not see a beginning;

follow it and there will be no end.

When we grasp the Tao of the ancient ones,

we can use it to direct our life today.

To know the ancient origin of Tao:

this is the beginning of wisdom.

When you cannot see what is happening in a group, do not stare harder. Relax and look with your inner eye.

When you do not understand what a person is saying, do not grasp for every word. Give up your efforts. Become silent inside and listen with your deepest self.

When you are puzzled by what you see or hear, push less, open out and be aware. See without staring. Listen quietly rather than listening hard. Use intuition and reflection rather than trying to figure things out.

The more you can let go of trying, and the more open and receptive you become, the more easily you will know what is happening.

Also, stay in the present. The present is more available than either memories of the past or fantasies of the future.

So attend to what is happening now.

Look for it and it cannot be seen--it is beyond sight.

Listen for it and it cannot be heard--it is beyond hearing.

Grasp at it and it cannot be caught--it is beyond substance.

These three cannot be fully comprehended.

They are fundamentally connected and somehow they are one.

Its highest isn't bright.

Its lowest isn't dark.

It is infinite! Continually emerging, completely beyond description,

It returns again and again to nothingness.

And this is what nothingness looks like:

It is the image of the absence of being.

(It sounds vague and elusive to me!)

Approach it and you wi not see its beginning

Follow it and you will not see its end.

If you cling to the Tao of ancient times

The present will be no problem.

To know the ancient origin is to follow the Tao.

Look
and see the manifestations of the Infinite

but not its essence.

Listen
and hear the manifestations of the Infinite

but not its essence.

Reach
out and touch the manifestations of the

Infinite

but not its essence.

These
three are one in their inability to relate

the essence of Infinity.

Above
it is not light.

Below it is not dark.

It is neither light nor dark.

Infinity
is the potential manifestation of all

things

and the essence into which all

manifestations

disintegrate.

Yet it is inconceivable and indescribable;

intangible but the essence of all

manifestations.

You
cannot confront what has no head

and you cannot follow what has no tail.

Remember
your oneness,

flow in the peace and harmony of Infinity,

live in the now, changing and flowing with

change.

There
was no beginning.

This is the mystery of Infinity.

Look; not seeing, call it invisible.

Listen; not hearing, call it silent.

Touch; not feeling, call it intangible.

These three fail to provide answers,

and are therefore combined into one.

It is above, but not recognized.

It is below, but not hiding.

A guideline without name, it returns to Nothing.

Its appearance has no shape, Nothing is its form.

It seems an illusion.

Approaching, it has no head.

Withdrawing, it has no back.

It continues its ancient ways,

controls the present,

knows the Primal Beginning.

This is the Way of Time.

Looked for, it cannot be seen:

it is not visible.

Listened for, it cannot be heard:

it makes no sound.

Grasped at, it cannot be held:

it is not tangible.

These three1 are beyond scrutiny.

But they are blended in the One.

On top it is not bright;

Underneath it is not dark.

It is unceasing and cannot be named;

It returns to nothingness.

It is called the formless form

And the imageless image.

That is why it is called obscure and indistinct.

Go to meet it, and you will find no beginning.

Follow after it, and you will find no end.

Hold to the ancient Tao

In order to manage events in the present.

Knowing the ancient beginning

Is called holding to Tao's thread.2

1. i.e. the three qualities of being invisible, soundless, and intangible.

2. or following the principle/system/tradition of Tao.

What you look at but can not see is called "formless."

What you listen to but can not hear is called "soundless."

What you grasp at but can not get is called "traceless."

Those three are an inseparable puzzle.

One can't know where it begins and where it ends.

Continuous and nameless, it returns to nothingness.

It is formless shape, imageless image, invisible vision.

One tries to meet it, but can see no head.

One tries to follow it, but can see no end.

In the domain of the Way, the past shapes the present,

And being able to feel the past is abiding by the Way.

"Look for It, you won't see It: It is called 'fleeting' Listen for It, you won't hear It: It is called 'thin'. Grasp at It, you can't get It: It is called 'subtle'."

These three lines are about something that evades scrutiny. Yes, in it everything blends and becomes one.

Its top is not bright Its underside is not dim. Always unnameable, It turns back to nothingness.

This is the shape of something shapeless the form of a nothing this is elusive and evasive. Encountering It, you won't see the front following It, you won't see Its back.

Keep to the Tao of the ancients and so manage things happening today. The ability to know the ancient sources, this is the main thread of Tao.

If you look at Tao, you cannot notice It at once. This is why It is called hard-to-be-seen.

If you listen to Tao, you cannot hear It immediately. This is why It is called hard-to-be-heard.

If you try to grasp Tao, you cannot reach It. This is why It is called hard-to-be-caught.

In Tao are Those Who fill you with delight!* All They in Tao are merged into One.

Tao is equal above and below.

Tao, infinite in size, cannot be called by the name of some of Them.

They come out from Tao manifesting Their Individualities and then come back to the state without individual manifestation — in It.

Tao has no corporal image and face. Therefore, It is said of as hidden and mysterious.

Meeting with Tao, I do not see Its face; following Tao, I do not see Its back.

By strictly following the primal Path of transformation of oneself as a consciousness, one can cognize that Eternal Origin. This Path is the Path to Tao.

* Holy Spirits coming out from Tao and coessential to It. In the aggregate sense, They are called in the Christian Tradition the Holy Spirit.

Looking at the Tao Way, it cannot be seen.

Trying to hear it, it cannot be heard.

Wishing to feel it, it cannot be touched.

These three characteristics cannot be defined,

The Tao Way cannot be perceived,

It has the consistency of the void.

It
is the shape without shape,

It cannot be known by senses.

The
Infinity the Eternal cannot be explained,

Meeting the Tao Way, it doesn't have a beginning,

Following the Tao Way, it doesn't have an end.

By
knowing how the Tao Way worked in the past

The present can be known.

Living the present as an effect of the past

Is to follow the Tao Way.

What
eludes observation is called yi (level). What escapes hearing is called xi (silent).
What is impalpable is called wei (minute). These three cannot be further pursued,
so I meld them together as One. Its upper part is not bright. Its lower part
is not dark. Unending, it cannot be adequately named and so returns to the status
of nothingness. This is called the formless form, the image without a thing
to be imaged. This is called impalpable and intangible. Going out to meet it
we do not see its head. Following it we do not see its end. Grasp the Dao of
antiquity to manage what is here today. Be able to know the ancient beginnings.
[The chain from antiquity to the present] is called the Thread running through
the Dao.

Looked at, it cannot be seen;

it is called colorless.

Listened to, it cannot be heard;

it is called soundless.

Grasped, it cannot be obtained;

it is called formless.

These three cannot be investigated further,

so they merge together to make one.

The upper part is not bright;

The lower part is not dark.

So subtle, it cannot be named,

But returns to nothingness.

This is called the shape without shape,

the image without image.

This is called indistinct:

confronting it, one cannot see the head;

following it, one cannot see the back.

Grasp the Ancient Tao to manage present existence.

Thus we may know the beginning of the Ancient.

This is called the record of Tao.

The Essence of Tao

Looked at but not seen:

Its name is formless.

Listened to but not heard:

Its name is soundless.

Reached for but not obtained:

Its name is intangible.

These three cannot be analyzed,

So they mingle and act as one.

Its rising is not bright;

Its setting is not dark.

Endlessly, the nameless goes on,

Merging and returning to nothingness.

That is why it is called

The form of the formless,

The image of nothingness.

That is why it is called elusive.

Confronted, its beginning is not seen.

Followed, its end is not seen.

Hold on to the ancient Tao;

Control the current reality.

Be aware of the ancient origins;

This is called the Essence of Tao.

Focus your eyes on the Dao. There is nothing to see. Tune your ear to its music. There is nothing to hear. Hold the Dao in your hands and it slips through your fingers. Be one with it and fill with true wisdom.

They call it elusive, and say

That one looks

But it never appears.

They say that indeed it is rare,

Since one listens,

But never a sound.

Subtle, they call it, and say

That one grasps it

But never gets hold.

These three complaints amount

To only one, which is

Beyond all resolution.

At
rising, it does not illumine;

At setting, no darkness ensues;

It stretches far back

To that nameless estate

Which existed before the creation.

Describe
it as form yet unformed;

As shape that is still without shape;

Or say it is vagueness confused:

One meets it and it has no front;

One follows and there is no rear.

If
you hold ever fast

To that most ancient Way,

You may govern today.

Call truly that knowledge

Of primal beginnings

The clue to the Way.

You look at it and it is not seen,

It is called the Formless.

You listen to it and it is not heard,

It is called the Soundless.

You grasp it and it is not to be held,

It is called the Intangible.

These three cannot be further inquired into.

It is the One in reality.

Its upper side is not bright,

Its underside is not dark,

Infinite and boundless, it is hardly namable,

It returns to a state with no shape or image.

This is called the shapeless shape, the bodiless image,

It is called the Vague and Elusive.

While meeting it, you cannot see its head,

While following it, you fail to see its back.

To hold on to the Tao of old in order to harness the things at present,

To be able to know the primeval beginning,

- This is called the Law of Tao.

When we look for it but see it not, we call it the invisible.

When we listen for it but hear it not, we call it the inaudible.

When we try to touch it but find it not, we call it the imperceptible.

Because these three aspects of it are impossible to probe, it remains a single amorphous unity.

Its risings cast no light, and its settings occasion no dark.

On and on it goes, unnamable, always reverting to nothingness.

This we refer to as the shape of that which has no shape, the image of that which has no physical existence.

This we refer to as dim and dark.

Try to meet it, but you will not see its head.

Try to follow it, but you will not see its tail, so hold on to the Dao of old to preside over what exists now.

It is possible to know how things were at the beginning of time.

This we refer to as holding the thread of the Dao.

1. We look at it but do not see it;

2. We name this "the minute."

3. We listen to it but do not hear it;

4. We name this "the rarefied."

5. We touch it but do not hold it;

6. We name this "the level and smooth."

7.
These three cannot be examined to the limit.

8. Thus they merge together as one.

9. "One"—there is nothing more encompassing above it,

10. And nothing smaller below it.

11. Boundless, formless! It cannot be named,

12. And returns to the state of no-thing.

13.
This is called the formless form,

14. The substanceless image.

15. This is called the subtle and indistinct.

16. Follow it and you won't see its back;

17. Greet it and you won't see its head.

18. Hold on to the Way of the present—

19. To manage the things of the present,

20. And to know the ancient beginning.

21. This is called the beginning of the thread of the Way.

You can't see
Tao, no matter how hard you look.

You can't hear Tao, no matter how hard you listen.

You can't hold on to Tao, no matter how hard you grab.

But it's there.

It's in you,

and it's all around you.

Remember that.

.

The Formless Way

We look at it, and do not see it; it is invisible.

We listen to it, and do not hear it; it is inaudible.

We touch it, and do not feel it; it is intangible.

These three elude our inquiries, and hence merge into one.

Not by its rising, is it bright,

nor by its sinking, is it dark.

Infinite and eternal, it cannot be defined.

It returns to nothingness.

This is the form of the formless, being in non-being.

It is nebulous and elusive.

Meet it, and you do not see its beginning.

Follow it, and you do not see its end.

Stay with the ancient Way

in order to master what is present.

Knowing the primeval beginning is the essence of the Way.

Not the man who searches and looks for it but one who closes his eyes becomes aware of the invisible.

Not by listening and straining to hear but in serene silence the soundless become audible.

Not by struggling to grasp and comprehend but in calmness and letting-go the incomprehensible reveals itself.

These three one should not do one must be them to realize the One and disbecome in it.

From outside TAO is obscure

Inside there is brightness

To the world of Being it is Non-being to Non-being Suprabeing:

Being behind all appearance

Spirit beyond form the unmoved before and after all movement.

Obscure is its beginning unknowable its ending.

Yet one who neither looks back nor ahead but stopping awakens to the All-presence of the now soars beyond the cycle of Becoming and decaying and returns home to the ONE.

Invisible, Inaudible, And Intangible

Lao Tze says,

Something which we look at, and cannot see, shall be called 'invisible'.

Something to which we listen, and cannot hear, shall be called 'inaudible'.

Something which we seize, and cannot grasp, shall be called 'intangible'.

These things are not available to be researched for realization when taken singly;

hence when we unite them again, we obtain the true one.

Its upper part is not bright, and its lower part is not obscure.

It works in its way perpetually without an end, but we can't know its motive.

Then this can be traced in the state of nothingness.

This is called the form of formlessness, and semblance of nothingness;

this is called the fleet of indeterminable.

We can neither retrace to see its beginning, nor can we expect to see its end.

When we hold the primordial Tao, we can rule today's being.

Since we can know the beginning of Heaven and Earth, we know the outline of the Tao.

EXPERIENCING THE MYSTERY

The
Tao is abstract,

and therefore has no form,

it is neither bright in rising,

nor dark in sinking,

cannot be grasped, and makes no sound.

Without
form or image, without existence,

the form of the formless, is beyond defining,

cannot be described,

and is beyond our understanding.

It cannot be called by any name.

Standing
before it, it has no beginning;

even when followed, it has no end.

In the now, it exists; to the present apply it,

follow it well, and reach its beginning.

Look, and it can't be seen.

Listen, and it can't be heard.

Reach, and it can't be grasped.

Above, it isn't bright.

Below, it isn't dark.

Seamless, unnamable,

it returns to the realm of nothing.

Form that includes all forms,

subtle, beyond all conception.

Approach it and there is no beginning;

follow it and there is no end.

You can't know it, but you can be it,

at ease in your own life.

Just realize where you come from:

this is the essence of wisdom.

Look at it, but it cannot be seen, it is called "the shapeless".

Listen to it, but it cannot be heard, it is called "the soundless".

Grasp it, but it cannot be held, it is called "the bodyless".

These three characteristics are incomprehensible, yet they uniquely constitute the oneness of Dao.

Look upward, it is not clear.

Look downward, it is not dim.

Continuously, continuously!

We are unable to trace it's original name because it returns to the state of Unknown existence.

It is called "the formless form" and "the imageless image".

That is why it is called "the indistinct and elusive".

To embrace Dao from ancient times is to know the original causes of the past in order to control what is going on in the present.

This is called "the Law of Dao".

Look for it and it can not be seen, it is called invisible;

Listen to it and it can not be heard, it is called inaudible;

Reach for it and it can not be touched, it is called intangible.

These three are beyond reckoning, so

When these three merge, they are One.

As for this One,

There is nothing above it remaining to be accounted for,

There is nothing below it that has been excluded.

Ever searching for it, it is beyond naming.

It returns to no-thing.

Its state is described as no state,

Its form is described as formless.

It is called the vision beyond focus.

Follow after it, and it proves endless.

Go before it, and no beginning can be found.

Employ the Tao of today in order to manage today's affairs and to know the ancient past.

This is called the principle of Tao.

XIV

You
can look at it, but you can't see it; it has no color, no size

You can listen to it, but you can't hear it; it has no tone, no words

You can grasp it, but you can't hold it; it has no texture, no shape

These three senses can not measure its depths

It passes beyond where they mingle and become one

One
- there is nothing greater around it

Nothing smaller inside

It has no edge, no definition, no name

And it is constantly returning to itself

It is the form of formlessness

The image of imagelessness

Subtle and hidden

How
can you follow what has no back

How can you lead what has no front

Stay with it, here and now, and you will find

The thread that runs unbroken from the ancient past

When You Look at It You Don't See It

What you don't see when you look

is called the unobtrusive.

What you don't hear when you listen

is called the rarefied.

What you don't get when you grasp

is called the subtle.

These three cannot be completely fathomed,

so they merge into one;

above is not bright, below is not dark.

Continuous, unnameable, it returns again to nothing.

This is called the stateless state,

the image of no thing;

this is called mental abstraction.

When you face it you do not see its head,

when you follow it you do not see its back.

Hold the ancient Way

so as to direct present existence:

only when you can know the ancient

can this be called the basic cycle of the Way.

Tao cannot be seen, cannot be heard, and cannot be grasped.

We cannot detect them with our senses.

Therefore, they form an entirety of Tao.

It is neither too bright above, nor is it too dark below.

It exists everywhere and yet cannot be pointed out.

So it is ultimately abstract.

It is a state without concrete constitution; it is an image without concrete shape.

So it is evasive.

When you look at it, you cannot see the beginning; when you follow it, you cannot see the end.

Using the time-tested Tao, we can handle the present problems.

Therefore, whose who understand Tao understand the laws of the universe.

Look at it but you cannot see it; its name is formless.

Listen to it but you cannot hear it; its name is soundless.

Grasp it but you cannot get it; its name is incorporeal.

These three attributes are unfathomable; therefore they mingle into one.

Its upper side is not bright; its under side not dim.

It continues endlessly, it is unnamable.

Until it returns beyond the realm of things, it is called the formless form, the non-material image; it is called the vague.

Confront it and you do not see its face!

Follow it and you do not see its back!

He who keeps with this timeless Way can dominate present events.

To know the timeless origin is to go into the Way.

Look, yet cannot be seen -- it is beyond form.

Listen, yet cannot be heard -- it is beyond sound.

Grasp, yet cannot be held -- it is intangible.

These three are indefinable; they are one.

Above it, not bright;

below it, not dark;

an unbroken thread, beyond description,

returns to nothingness,

as the form of formless,

as the image of imageless,

It is called indefinable.

Face it, there is no beginning.

Follow it, there is no end.

Behold the ancient Tao, manage the present.

Knowing the beginning, the essence of Tao.

Look at it, you cannot see it.

It is invisible.

Listen to it, you cannot hear it.

It is inaudible.

Reach for it, you cannot grasp it.

It is intangible.

These
three qualities are unfathomable

and so they fuse together and become one.

The
upper part is not bright.

The lower part is not dark.

Ceaselessly the Unnamed moves back to nothingness.

It has the form of the formless,

the image of the imageless.

It is indefinable and shadowy.

Go up to it and you will not see its front.

Follow it and you will not see its back.

Yet,
hold fast to this ancient Tao and

you will experience the present now-moment.

Know
its beginnings and

you can follow the path of the Tao.

Because
the eye cannot see it

it is called invisible.

Because the ear cannot hear it

it is called silent.

Because the hand cannot touch it

it is called vacuum.

These three absences point to

the empty way.

Its height does not illuminate,

its depth does not obscure.

It is infinite and beyond human terms,

collapsing in upon itself as it began.

Matter within vacuum

forms within the formless.

Facing it there is no front

behind it there is no back.

Knowing
the past,

move with the present.

To
know the past

of the universe

is to become

its essence.

Look at it, it can't be seen,

is called the invisible.

Listen to it, it can't be heard,

is called the inaudible.

Grasp at it, it can't be touched,

is called the fine formless..

These three elude all solid inquiries

And merge and become one.

Its
rising brings no light;

its sinking, no darkness.

Unceasing, continuous,

it can't be defined,

on the way back to where there's nothing.

It's called shape free from shapes;

forms without form;

the image of nothingness.

That's why it's called the elusive;

Go towards them, and you can see no physical front;

go after them, and you see no rear.

Hold on to the dao of old to master the things of the present.

Master what once was, at the start,

It's the essence of rarefied, pearl-stringed dao.

We look for it but do not see it;

we name it "subtle."

We listen for it but do not hear it;

we name it "rare."

We grope for it but do not grasp it;

we name it "serene."

These three cannot be fully fathomed,

Therefore,

They are bound together to make unity.

Of unity,

its top is not distant,

its bottom is not blurred.

Infinitely extended and unnameable,

It returns to nonentity.

This is called "the form of the formless, the image of nonentity."

This is called "the amorphous."

Following behind it, you cannot see its back;

Approaching it from the front, you cannot see its head.

Hold to the Way of today to manage the actualities of today,

thereby understanding the primeval beginning.

This is called "the thread of the Way."

Ie. Plainness is that which cannot be seen by looking at it.

He. Stillness is that which cannot be heard by listening to it.

We. Rareness is that which cannot be felt by handling it.

These, being indiscernible, may be regarded as an unity - I H W, Tao.

It is not bright above nor dark beneath.

Infinite in operation, it is yet without name.

Issuing forth it enters into Itself.

This is the appearance of the Non-Apparent, the form of the Non-Existent.

This is the unfathomable mystery.

Going before, its face is not seen; following after, its back is not observed.

Yet to regulate one's life by the ancient knowledge of Tao is to have found the path.

Return to Your Center

If you make a show of your love,

it will hide itself.

If you babble on about it,

your words will fail.

If you grasp and cling to it,

it will slip through your fingers.

You cannot approach that which has no beginning.

You cannot lose that which has no end.

You do not have to protect it.

How then can you experience it?

As a swimmer experiences the water.

Dive in.

If you are feeling somewhat separate

and distant from your beloved,

do the things that stabilize you.

Walk, dance, paint, meditate,

write, build, play, or sing.

When you return to your center

you will find your beloved waiting.

We look at it and do not see it; Its name is The Invisible. We listen
to it and do not hear it; Its name is The Inaudible. We touch it and do
not find it; Its name is The Subtle (formless).

These three cannot be further inquired into, And hence merge into one.

Going up high, it is not bright, and coming down low, it is not dark.
Infinite and boundless, it cannot be given any name; It reverts to
nothingness.

This is called shape without shape, Form without objects. It is the
Vague and Elusive. Meet it and you will not see its head. Follow it and
you will not see its back.

Hold on to the Tao of old in order to master the things of the
present. From this one may know the primeval beginning (of the
universe). This is called the bond of Tao.

What we look
for beyond seeing

And call the unseen,

Listen for beyond hearing

And call the unheard,

Grasp for beyond reaching

And call the withheld,

Merge beyond understanding

In a oneness

Which does not merely rise and give light,

Does not merely set and leave darkness,

But forever sends forth a succession of living things as mysterious

As the unbegotten existence to which they return.

That is why men have called them empty phenomena,

Meaningless images,

In a mirage

With no face to meet,

No back to follow.

Yet one who is anciently aware of existence

Is master of every moment,

Feels no break since time beyond time

In the way life flows.

If you look at it but cannot see it, this is called YI.

If you listen to it but cannot hear it, this is called XI.

If you touch it but cannot feel it, this is called WEI.

These three things cannot be fully understood.

Therefore, they are mixed into one thing: the DAO.

Its top is not bright, its bottom is not dark;

It is so elusive it cannot be described.

It is not a physical entity,

Having a shape that is shapeless and an image without an object.

This is why it is so elusive and dynamic.

When you look at the front, it has no beginning.

When you look behind, it has no end.

It allows you to apply the real knowledge of the past to the present.

Therefore, if you understand the real knowledge of the past,

You understand the principles of the DAO.

Looked at but not seen, it is thus called the invisible,

Listened to but not heard, it is thus called the inaudible,

Reached for but not grasped, it is thus called the intangible:

These three are beyond the reach of sense and reason,

Yet, in the moment of kosmic union,

They merge in spiritual awareness as the Universal One.

There is no above that is bright, nor below that is dark,

But only the infinite, forever indefinable, always reverting to nothingness.

Therefore,

it is called form of the formless, image of the imageless.

And it is known as the amorphous.

Confronting it, no head is seen from the front.

Following it, no rear is seen from behind.

Whereby one lives in the present in accordance with the Tao Eternal,

Thereby one comes to know the beginning of time.

This is called the Universal Law of the Tao.

What you look at but can not see is called "formless."

What you listen to but can not hear is called "soundless."

What you grasp at but can not get is called "traceless."

Those three are an inseparable puzzle.

One can't know where it begins and where it ends.

Continuous and nameless, it returns to nothingness.

It is formless shape, imageless image, invisible vision.

One tries to meet it, but can see no head.

One tries to follow it, but can see no end.

In the domain of the Way, the past shapes the present,

And being able to feel the past is abiding by the Way.

Looked at it cannot be seen - it is beyond form; and is seen as remote.

Listened to it cannot be heard - it is beyond sound; it is indistinct.

Reach for it, and you cannot grasp it. It is beyond reach and is ephemeral.

These unknowable things evade definition,

And blend into a single mystery,

called The Tao.

Its top is not bright;

Its bottom is not dark;

faultless, unnamable,

it returns to the realm of nothing.

Thus, it is called the formless form,

The image with nothing to see,

something subtle, beyond all conception.

Draw near it and there is no beginning;

chase after it and there is no end.

By holding to the ancient Tao

You can manage current existence

And know the ancient beginnings.

This is called the very beginning thread of the Tao.

