===== Chapter 72 =====

The people do not fear might

That imitates the Great Might to the extreme.

Do not disrespect their dwelling places.

Do not hate their homelands.

It is only because one does not hate

That one is therefore not hated.

Therefore, the sages

Know themselves but do not display themselves.

Are kind to themselves but do not prize themselves.

Thus, leave that and take up this.

When people are not in awe of power, Power becomes great.

Do not intrude into their homes, Do not make their lives weary. If you do not weary them, They will not becoem weary of you.

Therefore the Sage Has self-knowledge without self-display, Self-love without personal pride, Rejects one, accepts the other.

When people have no fear of what they should fear.

Something really fearsome will come on them.

Do not constrict their living space.

Do not reduce their means of livelihood.

If they're not pestered they will not get weary.

Therefore the sage knows himself

But does not flaunt himself.

He loves himself

But does not exalt himself.

He chooses what truly has value,

Spurns what only seems that way.

RECOGNITION OF ATTRIBUTES

Be not irate should others fail to be awed by your attributes.

Having true importance, circumstances will ultimately bring proper recognition.

Imprison them not -

Harass and oppress them not,

Treating them compassionately,

You, in turn, will be so treated.

Thus the Sage,

Knowing his own power,

Does not overtly display it.

Loving himself,

Does not exalt himself.

Rejecting external sensuousness,

He accepts the powers within his being.

When people are not afraid of the power of the Tao then the great power will be at its height.

The vessel (body) will not be restricted.

Inhabit a vessel free of restrictions.

It gives life.

For this exact reason the masters do not go beyond their limits.

They do not go beyond their limits.

The sage naturally perceives and does not have opinions.

They naturally express humanity in their actions and do not give preference to themselves.

They are able to discard giving preference to themselves and take hold of expressing humanity in their actions.

CONCERNING LOVE OF SELF

When men fear not that which is to be feared, that which they fear cometh

upon them.

Let
them not live, without thought, the superficial life.

Let them not weary of the Spring of Life!

By
avoiding the superficial life, this weariness cometh not upon them.

These
things the wise man knoweth, not showeth: he loveth himself,

without isolating his value. He accepteth the former and rejecteth

the latter.

When the people do not fear what they ought to fear, that which istheir great dread will come on them. Let them not thoughtlessly indulgethemselves in their ordinary life; let them not act as if weary of whatthat life depends on. It is by avoiding such indulgence that such wearinessdoes not arise. Therefore the sage knows (these things) of himself, butdoes not parade (his knowledge); loves, but does not (appear to set a)value on, himself. And thus he puts the latter alternative away and makeschoice of the former.

When people have forgotten what to be afraid of,

They will live in vague fear

Why do they come to terms with this miserable way of living?

Why don't they see the beauty of life?

Why are they so scared of escaping their rut?

One who is wise understands this, and won't flaunt it

He enjoys it but doesn't consider it as his own merit

He abandons his old way of living and embraces true life

Do not be irritated when people do not recognize your importance; For if you are really important, sooner or later circumstances will force them to recognize it.

Do not treat them contemptuously nor despise them; For only when you do not despise them will they not despise you.

Although the intelligent man knows his own importance, He does not require that others recognize it; and he esteems himself for what he is, But does not insist that others esteem him. He does not seek to be esteemed by others because he recognizes his self-esteem as sufficicent.

Never mind if the people are not intimidated by your authority.

A Mightier Authority will deal with them in the end.

Do not narrow their dwelling or harass their lives;

And for the very reason that you do not harass them,

They will cease to turn from you.

Therefore the Sage knows himself but does not show himself.

Knows his own value, but does not put himself on high.

Truly, he rejects that but takes this".

When people do not respect power,

disaster is on the horizon.

Do not limit their space.

Do not disrupt their lives.

Do not oppress them

and they will not tire of you.

The sage knows himself, but does not claim knowledge.

He loves himself, but does not feel important.

He lets go of that and chooses this.

(When) the people do not heed the imposing

Then great impositions come to pass

Do not constrict the places where they live

Do not overtax their means of living

Only when there is no oppressing

Will there then be no oppression

This is how wise ones know themselves

Without displaying themselves

Love themselves

Without venerating themselves

And so dismiss That to choose This

Diplomacy

When the people do not respect those in power,

Then what they greatly fear, is about to arrive.

Do not narrow the size of the places in which they live;

Do not oppress them in their means of livelihood.

It is simply because you do not oppress them,

That they therefore will not be fed up.

Therefore the sage knows himself

but does not show himself;

He cherishes himself but does not value himself.

For this reason he lets go of that and chooses this.

If people fear your power, then you don't really have any.

Leave them alone in their homes. Respect them in their lives, and they won't grow weary of you.

The sage knows herself, but doesn't dwell on herself; Loves herself, but no more than she loves everyone else. She adopts the concerns of heaven as her own.

Let the fear of God die among the people,

And they will find their own true guide within.

Do not constrict them in their homes,

Or oppress them at their work,

For if the people lack a sense of burden,

Then they will not feel oppressed.

Thus, the teaching heart of the Cosmos:

It is a living, dynamic consciousness-

It draws close to sincerity,

And retreats from exaltation.

The former it receives,

The latter it discards.

The fear of God is of a distant and threatening Being, which can only inflict pain and guilt, while repressing one's inner truth (the "true Guide" mentioned). Societies and governments behave like such a daunting God-force when they dictate and limit the acceptable norms of living and working, even to the point of defining what a proper home and job must be. When these strictures are lifted, then there is the deepest liberation. Just be sincere, and you will be helped.

Lead Humbly But Surely

When
the people do not fear absolute rule,

a greater fear will yet descend on them.

Do
not give them cramped quarters.

Do not make sacrifice of their children.

If you do not dislike them

you will not be disliked yourself.

The
truly wise know themselves

but do not flaunt themselves.

The truly wise love themselves

but do not take pride in themselves.

They reject the one and accept the other.

The limits of the greatest fear have been reached when the people cease to fear that which is to be feared.

Neither regard your lot as mean, nor despise the conditions of your birth, for that which is not despised arouses no disgust.

Hence although the Holy Man knows himself he makes no display; although he loves himself he seeks no reputation. On this account he rejects the one while clinging to the other.

If the people have no fear of their ruling authority, still greater fear will come.

Be sure not to give them too narrow a dwelling;

Nor make their living scanty.

Only when their dwelling place is no longer narrow will their dissatisfaction come to an end.

Self-love

If the people do not fear authority then great authority has arrived.

Don't toy around with things they are at home with.

Don't despise things that contribute to their livelihood.

In general, only if you don't despise [them], using this [they] will not despise
[you].

Using this: Sages start from what they know to do not from what they see.

Start from love not from value.

So they choose this and reject that.

When people are free from fear,

They experience "basic dread."

Because they are not limited by the places in which they stay,

They are at peace with their lives.

Because they are at peace with their lives,

Their lives are peaceful.

Therefore, the wise is aware of himself,

But does not display himself.

He cultivates himself,

But is not proud of himself.

He leaves behind small fear,

But experiences basic dread.

When people lack a sense of awe, then disaster will descend upon them.

Do not narrow the living space of the mind.

Do not reject the inherent character.

Because one does not reject, one will not be rejected.

That is why the sage knows himself but does not flaunt himself.

He loves himself but does not value himself.

Therefore he discards one and takes the other.

If the people do not fear terror,

Greater terror shall arrive.

Do not squeeze their habitation;

Do not obstruct their livelihood.

Only when you stop oppressing them

Will they stop loathing you.

Hence, the sage man

Knew himself without parading himself,

Loved himself without exalting himself.

Therefore, he abandoned that and chose this.

If the people do not fear the ruling authority,

A much greater fear will befall them.

Be sure that you do not make them live in crowded quarters

Or make their lives unbearable.

Only when their living quarters are not crowded

Will their dissatisfaction disappear.

When the people lack a proper sense of awe, then some awful visitation will
descend upon them.

Do
not constrict their living space;

Do not press down on their means of livelihood.

It is because you do not press down on them that they will not weary of the
burden.

Hence
the sage knows himself but does not display himself,

Loves himself but does not exalt himself.

Therefore
he discards the one and takes the other.

Holding Oneself Dear

If the people do not fear the dreadful, the great dreadful will come, surely.

Let them not deem their lives narrow. Let them not deem their lot wearisome. When it is not deemed wearisome, then it will not be wearisome.

Therefore the holy man knows himself but does not display himself. He holds himself dear but does not honor himself. Thus he discards the latter and chooses the former.

The master's sense of wonder is constant, like a déjà vu that never ends. He realises this wonder is missing from others, but leaves them be unless they ask for help. Having no self, he understands them. If he would push or prod, they would distance themselves. He has let go of the idea that people can be helped.

When the populace is unafraid of threats, major threats loom.

Do not harass their neighborhood;

Do not interfere with their livelihood.

Thus, without interference, people will not interfere.

Thus, the sage knows self without self-touting, respects self without self-aggrandizement.

Thus,

forsake self-touting and self-aggrandizement;

embrace self-knowledge and self-respect.

When the people stop fearing the fearsome something truly fearsome will descend upon them.

Don't hem them in

and choke their lives with oppression.

That's all.

Just let them be,

and they'll never tire of you.

A sage sees through himself without revealing himself,

loves himself without exalting himself,

always ignores that and chooses this.

When the people are no longer afraid of the power of authority,

Then the awesome power of authority descends with a vengeance.

Do not disturb the people in their habitats,

Do not choke off their means of livelihood.

Only by not being oppressive, will people feel not oppressed.

Therefore a wise ruler:

Knows his authority, but does not show of his power,

Values self-respect, but does not exalt his position.

Thus he chooses this and rejects the other.

People
lack respect for impressive strength

And then greatly impressive strength is reached.

An
absence of improper familiarity for what is their place of residence

An absence of detesting what is their place of living

In the end only without detesting

Appropriate lack of detesting happens.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Know themselves without displaying themselves

Are fond of themselves without treasuring themselves.

So
detach from that, grab this.

Those (who expose themselves to danger through curiosity, love of gain, or ambition) should be afraid when they are not afraid. For they are lost.

Do not consider your place of birth too restricting, do not become dissatisfied with the condition in which you were born. (Stay what you are and where you are. The effort to seek for better could perhaps cause you to lose you way). One does not become dissatisfied, if one does not wish to become so. (Dissatisfaction is always voluntary, coming from preparing one's situation with another, and having preference for the other).

The Sage knows his worth but does not show it, (he does not feel the need to show it off). He respects himself but does not try to be esteemed. He discerns, adopting this, and rejecting that (after the light of his wisdom).

When people no longer fear force

They bring about greater force

Do not limit their place

Do not reject their livelihood

Because the ruler does not reject them

Therefore they do not reject the ruler

Therefore the sages:

Know themselves but do not glorify themselves

Respect themselves but do not praise themselves

Thus they discard that and take this

When people no longer fear the dominating force of authority, they will bring about greater force against the authority in an uprising.

Thus the wise ruler would not attempt to limit the people in their living space or their thoughts. Nor would the wise ruler deny the people their means of livelihood.

If the ruler does not oppress the people in these ways, the people also will not reject the leadership.

Therefore, when interacting with people, the sages are accepting and humble. They possess the clarity of self-knowledge, so they have no need to put themselves on a pedestal to seek external validation. They possess the confidence of self-respect, so they have no need to praise themselves and highlight their own achievements.

Thus, the sages discard arrogance and pomposity while embracing self-knowledge and self-respect.

TO CHERISH ONE\\\'S SELF

When people are too ignorant to fear the fearsome thing, then it will surely come. Do not make the place where they dwell confining, the life they live wearisome. If they are let alone, they will not become restless. Therefore the wise man while not understanding himself regards himself, while cherishing he does not overvalue himself. Therefore he discards flattery and prefers regard.

When the people fear no power,

Then great power has indeed arrived.

Do not disturb them in their dwellings,

Do not weary them in their living.

It is because you do not weary (pu yen) them,

That they are not wearied of you.

Therefore the sage knows himself (tzu chih),

But does not see himself (tzu chien).

He loves himself (tzu ai),

But does not exalt himself (tzu kuei).

Therefore he leaves that and takes this.

Lead Humbly But Surely

When the people do not fear absolute rule, greater fear will yet descend on them.

Do not give them cramped quarters; do not make sacrifice of their children. If you do not dislike them you will not be disliked yourself. The truly wise know themselves but do not flaunt themselves. The truly wise love themselves but do not take pride in themselves. Therefore, they reject the one and accept the other.

When the people do not fear your power,

then your power has become truly great.

Do not intrude into their homes.

Do not interfere with their work.

If you do not oppress them, then they will not become sick of you.

Thus, the Tao–Master knows himself, but does not show himself.

He loves himself, but is not arrogant.

Therefore, he lets go of that and chooses this.

Seventy-two

When men lack a sense of awe, there will be disaster.

Do not intrude in their homes.

Do not harass them at work.

If you do not interfere, they will not weary of you.

Therefore
the sage knows himself but makes no show,

Has self-respect but is not arrogant.

He lets go of that and chooses this.

When the people are not afraid of the threatening might of the authority,

The great tumult will soon ensue.

Do not harass their living places;

Do not deprive them of their means of livelihood.

If you do not oppress the people,

The people will not be tired of you (the ruler).

Hence the sage knows himself but does not praise himself;

loves himself but does not honor himself.

That is why he discards the latter and takes the former.

When the people do not fear the authority [of the sovereign],

The supreme authority arrives.

They are neither contented in their abodes,

Nor satisfied with their lives.

Only because they are not satisfied,

They cannot be suppressed.

Therefore the sage

Knows himself but does not show himself,

Cherishes himself but does not exalt himself.

Therefore he discards that and takes this.

When people do not respect the authority,

Legislation bearing stiff penalties will soon follow.

Nevertheless, the ruler should not make people's lives a living hell.

If the ruler is not oppressive, they will not loathe him.

Although the sage is conscious of his ability, he does not show off his talent.

While maintaining his self-righteousness, he does not flaunt his eminence.

He thus rejects parading his eminence, but he embraces his self-esteem.

Self-Respect

Ai Chi

When people no longer fear authority,

Great Authority will come to them.

Do not pen them up in narrow surroundings;

Do not make them weary of life.

Only when they are not wearied,

Will they cease to be weary.

That's why the Sage has self-knowledge,

But does not display himself;

He maintains his self-respect,

But does not feel high and mighty.

Forsooth, he rejects this and adopts that.

If people are not awestruck by that authority which rightly claims their awe,

Be sure a greater fear, the fear of death, will not let them escape.

But do not confine them within narrow walls,

Not interfere with their lot;

If you refrain from despising htem, you will not be despised by them.

Thus it is with the Sage:

He knows himselfr, yet makes no parade of himself.

He loves himself, yet does not overrate himself.

Indeed, he disregards That and nurtures This.

When people don't fear force,

Greater force is on the way.

Don't meddle with their homes

Or weary them at their work.

Only when they are not wearied

Will they not weary you.

Therefore,

The sage knows himself,

But makes no show of himself.

Loves himself,

But does not exalt himself.

He rejects the outward,

Accepts the inward.

When people lack a sense of pure spiritual piety toward natural life,

then awful things happen in their life.

Therefore, respect where you dwell.

Love your life and livelihood.

Because you do not disparage your life and livelihood, you will never become tired of life.

Thus, one of natural whole virtue respects his own life, but is not egotistical.

He loves his life, but does not exalt himself.

He holds a sense of spiritual serenity for all things, and disparages nothing.

Hence, he does what is right and gives up what is not right.

LXXII.

Loving
Oneself

When
people to the dreadful give no heed,

On
them will come what is their greatest dread;

Then
narrow not the dwelling place they need,

Do
not depreciate the life they lead,

For
from dislike of things dislike is bred.

Therefore
the one who knows himself, the sage,

Of
what he is himself makes
no
display,

He
loves himself, indeed, from youth to age,

But
self-esteem does not his mind engage,

He
chooses that and this he puts away.

If the people do not dread majesty,

Then great majesty will come to them.

Let them guard the innermost of their dwellings,

Let them press towards the innermost of their life.

The Master indeed is not bound,

That is why he is not bound.

That is how the self-controlled man knows the Self and perceives the not-Self.

He loves the Self, and honours the not-Self.

Therefore he passes away from the latter and takes hold of the former.

When people

no longer fear

your power,

It is a sign

that a greater power

is coming.

Interfere not lightly

with a persons house,

(Do not intrude on their privacy.)

Do not make heavy taxes upon their work.

Only when you stop tiring them,

Will they stop being tired of you.

The Complete Thinker

knows self,

But makes

no show of self;

Loves self,

But does not

lift self

above others.

They prefer

what is within

to what

is without.

If the people feel no awe for the awful, the greater will be the awe.

Do not restrict them in their dwellings, do not weary them in their livelihood. Indeed, just because they are not wearies, they will not be weary.

Therefore the Saint knows himself, but does not display himself; he is careful of himself, but does not value himself. For he rejects the one and chooses the other.

When the people do not fear what they ought to fear, that which

is their great dread will come on them.

Let
them not thoughtlessly indulge themselves in their ordinary

life; let them not act as if weary of what that life depends on.

It
is by avoiding such indulgence that such weariness does not

arise.

Therefore
the sage knows (these things) of himself, but does not

parade (his knowledge); loves, but does not (appear to set a) value

on, himself. And thus he puts the latter alternative away and makes

choice of the former.

When
the people do not fear what is majestic,
Great Majesty will soon visit them.

Do
not limit their dwellings
nor suppress their livelihoods.
Simply because
you do not oppress them,
they will not grow tired of you.
For
this reason,
Sages are self-aware,
but do not flaunt themselves;

they are self-focused,
but do not glorify themselves.
They
out-grow the one and adopt the other.

When
the sense of wonder goes

Disaster is not far behind

Don't intrude in people's lives

And they won't think you are unkind

The
seer sees both this and that

But doesn't ask for praise

Finding this immensity

With just a simple inward gaze

WHEN the people no longer fear your power,

It is a sign that a greater power is coming.

Interfere not lightly vith their dwelling,

Nor lay heavy burdens upon their livelihood.

Only when you cease to weary them,

They will cease to be wearied of you.

Therefore, the Sage knows himself,

But makes no show of himself,

Loves himself,

But does not exalt himself.

He prefers what is within to what is without.

When the people have no more fear of oppression; that is when oppressive forces will overtake them.

Do not restrict the people in their dwellings.

Do not oppress the people with heavy taxes and burdens.

If you do not wear the people out, they will not weary of you.

Therefore it is that sages know themselves well, but this self-knowledge is not displayed for all to see.

The sage respects himself, but does not try to become admired.

He will choose self-knowledge and love, and set conceit and opinion aside.

When people become overly bold,

then disaster will soon arrive.

Do
not meddle with people's livelihood;

by respecting them they will in turn respect you.

Therefore,
the Master knows herself but is not arrogant.

She loves herself but also loves others.

This is how she is able to make appropriate choices.

Group work must include spiritual awareness if it is to touch the existential anxiety of our times. Without awe, the awful remains unspoken; a diffuse malaise remains.

Be willing to speak of traditional religion, no matter how offended some group members may be. Overcome the bias against the word of God. The great force of our spiritual roots lies in tradition, like it or not.

The wise leader models spiritual behaviour and lives in harmony with spiritual values. There is a way of knowing, higher than reason; there is a self, greater than egocentricity.

The leader demonstrates the power of selflessness and the unity of all creation.

When people lose their fear of power

Then great power has indeed arrived.

Do not intrude on the people's materia living.

Do not despise their spiritua lives, either.

If you respect them, you will be respected.

Therefore the Sage knows himself,

But he is not opinionated.

He loves himself, but he is not arrogant.

He lets go of conceit and opinion, and embraces self-knowledge and

love.

When
people are not in awe of the Infinite,

they are overwhelmed by confusion.

Do
not violate another's space.

Do not interfere with another's livelihood.

If
you do not violate their space

or interfere with their livelihood,

they will not separate

themselves

from you.

The
sage acknowledges herself but

does not distinguish herself

from others.

She
lives her reality

but does not try to foist it on others.

She
makes her choices

but is indifferent and unattached

and therefore lives in peace and

harmony.

When people do not respect authority, a greater authority appears.

Do not invade their homes.

Do not complicate their lives.

Only when they are not wearied, will they not be weary.

Thus is the Wise Man self-aware, but not self-absorbed;

self-confident, but not self-centered.

Therefore, give up the latter for the former.

Unless the people stand in awe of the authority over them,

A greater authority will soon take over.1

Let them manage their own domestic affairs for themselves;

Let them work according to their own dispositions.

If you do not oppress them, they will not be oppressed.2

Therefore, the Sage knows himself

But does not reveal himself.

He respects himself

Without being arrogant.

Thus he discards one and chooses the other.

1. or The people may not stand in awe of their ruler's authority; But an authority greater than this [Heaven or Tao] will bring them to an end they deserve.

2. i.e. if the people are not oppressed, and are left to conduct their affairs for themselves, they will not resist or resent the authority of the state.

When people revolt,

Governmental prestige ends.

The ruler should always bear this in mind:

Never narrow the roads of life;

Never cause people to be dissatisfied with their existence.

For, satisfied with life,

None would revolt against the government.

The moral for the ruler is:

Know one's own shortcomings

Instead of being occupied with one's own views.

Appreciate others' appreciation

Instead of imposing one's self upon others.

That is how the wise person makes choices.

When the people are not in awe of your majesty then great majesty has been achieved.

Do not restrict where they can live do not tire them out by taxing what they live on. Simply do not tire them and they will not tire of you.

And so, the Wise Person: Knows himself does not make a show of himself. Loves himself does not exalt himself. Yes, he leaves 'that' aside, and attends to 'this.'

He who lives with fear cannot become strong. The strength of consciousness can be gained only if one lives without fear.

So rid yourself of the ability to despise others! He who despises others is despicable before Tao!

Rid yourself of violence in relations with others! He who does violence to others will be subjected to violence.

Renounce the ability to deceive people! He who deceives others deceives himself.*

Live in love!

Do not strive to show yourself off! The wise who cognized his Higher Essence is not engaged in self-admiration and does not elevate himself over others.

He who got rid of egocentrism gains the possibility to achieve Tao.

* Because such a person does not take into account God and His principles of formation of people's destinies.

The Wise One does not act without the inner urge.

He does not interfere with other people affairs,

He takes to arms only in defense.

Although
he knows his value very well,

The Wise One does not exalt his personality.

He gives great respect o himself,

But does not expect the same from others.

He lets the course of actions of life to flow,

When they do not touch him in any way.

He intervenes only when actions,

Have significance for his life.

When
the people do not fear terrible things, then the great terrors arrive. [Therefore:]
Do not restrict the range of their daily activities. Do not oppress them in
their livelihood. Now it is only by not oppressing them that they will not find
your presence oppressive. For this reason the Sage knows himself but does not
show himself. He loves himself but does not exalt himself. So he rids himself
of that and accepts this.

If the people do not dread power,

There will be the appearance of great power.

Do not restrict their living quarters.

Do not disturb their livelihood.

Just because one does not annoy them,

He will not be annoyed by them.

Therefore, the Sage knows himself but does not display himself.

He loves himself but does not distinguish himself.

Therefore, he rejects that to prefer this.

The Appropriate Perspective

If the people do not fear authority,

Then authority will expand.

Do not disrespect their position;

Do not reject their lives.

Since indeed they are not rejected,

They do not reject.

Therefore, enlightened people know themselves,

But do not display themselves.

They love themselves,

But do not treasure themselves.

Hence they discard one and receive the other.

Try to teach and you will confuse your family. Give them nothing to learn and they will learn everything.

If people do not dread your majesty,

A greater dread will yet descend on them.

See then you do not cramp their dwelling place,

Or immolate their children or their stock,

Nor anger them by your own angry ways.

It
is the Wise Man's way to know himself,

And never to reveal his inward thoughts;

He loves himself but so, is not set up;

He chooses this in preference to that.

When the people do not fear the force (of the ruler),

Something forceful and terrible would happen.

Don't force the people out of their houses,

Don't block their way of livelihood.

Only by not oppressing the people, can one make the people feel no oppression.

Therefore the sage seeks for self-knowledge, not for self-parade, for self-love, not for self-importance.

So, self-parade and self-importance should be abandoned and self-knowledge and self-love should be kept.

If the common folk do not fear force, then such great force will arrive that there will be no restricting them to the boundaries within which they should dwell, no satisfying them within the limits in which they should live.

It is just because one is insatiable

That there is no satisfying him.

Therefore what the sage himself knows he does not himself reveal.

He cherishes himself but does not value himself.

Thus he rejects the one and keeps the other.

1. When the people don't respect those in power, then what they greatly fear
is about to arrive.

2.
Don't narrow the size of the places in which they live;

3. Don't oppress them in their means of livelihood.

4. It's simply because you do not oppress them, that they therefore will not
be fed up.

5. Therefore the Sage knows himself but doesn't show himself;

6. he cherishes himself but doesn't value himself.

7. For this reason, he rejects that and takes this.

When you show
no fear at all,

the universe gives you something

to really be afraid of.

Don't try to
fence people in

or grind them down.

Just let them be,

and they'll always be on your side.

The Masters
know themselves,

but they don't reveal themselves.

They love themselves,

but they know

what their lives are worth.

They let go of all that

to concentrate on this.

.

Do Not Suppress

When people lack a sense of awe,

then something awful will happen.

Do not constrict people's living space.

Do not suppress their livelihoods.

If you do not harass them, they will not harass you.

Therefore the wise know themselves

but do not display themselves.

They love themselves but do not exalt themselves.

They let go of one and accept the other.

Where reverence disappears among men fear is growing.

Let them therefore self-conscious live in themselves.

Let them awake to their essence strive for the inner life.

Then they will move from the narrowness of the ego into the wide expanse of the Self.

Likewise the Awakened Man:

He knows the Self and puts his ego in the second place.

He loves the Self and thinks little of his ego.

Because he does not hold his ego in high esteem he is upheld by the Highest the Self.

On Gentility

Lao Tze says,

The time when people do not fear punishment is the time when a great dread will descend upon them.

Let them not thoughtlessly indulge themselves in their ordinary life.

Let them not act as if they are weary of what life depends on.

It is by avoiding such indulgence that such weariness does not arise.

Therefore the sage knows himself, but does not parade his knowledge;

loves himself, but does not value himself.

Therefore he rejects the punishment and accepts the gentility.

LOVING THE SELF

The
sage retains a sense of awe, and of propriety.

He does not intrude into others' homes;

does not harass them,

nor interfere without request,

unless they damage others.

So it is that they return to him.

'Though
the sage knows himself

he makes no show of it;

he has self-respect, but is not arrogant,

for he develops the ability to let go of that

which he no longer needs.

When they lose their sense of awe,

people turn to religion.

When they no longer trust themselves,

they begin to depend upon authority.

Therefore the Master steps back

so that people won't be confused.

He teaches without a teaching,

so that people will have nothing to learn.

People are not afraid of punishment, yet capital punishment is enforced.

Do not force people into moving.

Do not weary people of living.

Hence, only non-interference prevents people from becoming weary.

Therefore, Sage rulers were aware of self but not self-displaying;

self-respecting but not self-exalting.

He eliminated the former and supplied the later.

People are fearless before the power.

If fear arises, it will be a great fear.

Not constraining the living environment,

They do not get bored by life.

Because we do not get bored, there is no boredom.

Therefore the sage is self-aware but not introspective.

He has self-respect but does not price himself.

He rejects one and takes the other.

LXXII

When
people don't fear your power, then you have found true power

You can only constrain people by making them fear you

Limit their actions and their potentials by making them fear the consequences

But if they fear like this they will feel cheated and be discontent

Know
where you want to the nation to go, but don't worry about how to get there

Know your worth, but let others find it for themselves

When the People Are Not Awed by Authority

When the people are not awed by authority,

then great authority is attained.

Their homes are not small to them,

their livelihood not tiresome.

Just because they do not tire of it,

it is not tiresome to them.

Therefore sages know themselves

but do not see themselves.

They take care of themselves

but do not exalt themselves.

So they take one

and leave the other.

When people defy authority, great threat will come.

Do not disturb people's homes; do not interfere with people's lives.

Only this way, we can avoid getting weary.

Sages know themselves but are not presumptuous.

They have self-esteem but are not self-conceit.

That is, take the former and abandon the latter.

When the people no longer fear power, it is a sign that a great power is coming.

Do not constrict their dwelling, nor lay heavy burdens upon their life.

Only when you do not weary them, they will not be wearied of you.

Therefore, the sage knows himself, but makes no show of himself; loves himself, but does not exalt himself.

He prefers what is within to what is without.

When men are not afraid of authority,

the supreme authority cannot enter their houses,

cannot scare their children.

Only if you try not scare them,

they will not sick of you.

Therefore, the sage (ruler) knows his authority, but makes no show;

has self-respect but is not arrogant.

He let go of that, chooses this.

When the people lack a sense of awe

disaster will descend upon them.

Do
not constrict their living space.

Do not harass them in their work.

If you do not oppress them, they will not weary of you.

Therefore,
True Persons know themselves

but make no show of themselves.

They know their value

but do not exalt themselves.

They prefer this within to that without.

If
your authority is not sufficient

relax

let go

the power of the universe will suffice.

Do not restrict others

or make them do things you want

let go

and they will stop running from you.

The
wise

know themselves,

know their power

but do not show it,

know their own quality

but do not use praises or titles.

Let
go

of that

take this.

If the people hardly fear what's dreadful, something greatly dreadful could
descend. If people have no fear of force, then great force descends. So never
mind if people are not intimidated by your authority. Some mightier authority
could deal with them in the long run.

Neither
despise their dwellings nor narrow the living space of their dwellings. They
could cease to turn away if you don't put them in jail. Don't dislike their
offspring, harass or oppress their lives. Don't harass them, and they could
cease to turn from you. Drop heavy taxes, and the people won't be fed up. If
you don't persecute all, you'll hardly be so much disliked. They're not oppressed
if you refrain from gross oppressive measures.

So
the wise man knows himself but hardly shows off. Knows his own value, but doesn't
exalt himself

Truly, "he rejects the one (brute force or enemicy) but accepts or takes the
other (being some kind, sturdy neighbour)."

When the people do not fear the majestic,

Great majesty will soon visit them.

Do not limit their dwellings,

Do not suppress their livelihood.

Simply because you do not suppress them, they will not grow weary of you.

For this reason,

The sage is self-aware, but does not flaunt himself;

He is self-devoted, but does not glorify himself.

Therefore,

He rejects the one and adopts the other.

When men do not have a right fear of present dangers, they run into extremes of peril.

Let them beware of enlarging the house, being wary of present conditions.

If they do not despise it, no such weariness will arise.

This is why the Sage, while possessed of self-knowledge, does not parade himself.

He loves, but does not value himself highly.

Thus he can put away pride, and is content.

The Religion of Your Heart

Be cautious of religion.

Rules and doctrines are lifeless things,

dried leaves blowing in the Autumn breeze.

The Mystery of the Tao cannot be taught,

it can only be revered and trusted.

Stand beside each other hand in hand

and watch the moon together.

Hold each other close

and be completely present in your passion.

Walk beside the splashing stream

and let your thoughts float on the water.

You will see and know.

Spirituality touches the deepest feelings of the heart.

Do not seek to convert or enlighten one another.

Seek only to understand and cherish

the uniqueness of each other's soul.

Treating each other with acceptance and grace

is the religion of your heart.

When the people do not fear what is dreadful, Then what is greatly dreadful will fall upon them.

Do not reduce the living space of their dwellings. Do no oppress their
lives. It is because you do not oppress them that they are not
oppressed.

Therefore the sage knows himself but does not show himself. He loves
himself but does not exalt himself. Therefore he rejects the one but
accepts the other.

Upon those who
defy authority

It shall be visited,

But not behind prison walls

Nor through oppression of their kin;

Men sanely led

Are not led by duress.

To know yourself and not show yourself,

To think well of yourself and not tell of yourself,

Be that your no and your yes.

When the people are not afraid of the ruler, the ruler is in the most danger.

Do not bother the people, do not suppress the people.

Only when you do not suppress the people, will they not be annoyed with you.

So, the great men understood everything but did not let themselves be known.

They valued their lives but did not let themselves be worshipped.

Therefore, keep the former and discard the latter.

If people do not revere the Law of Nature,

It will inexorably and adversely affect them.

If they accept it with knowledge and reverence,

It will accommodate them with balance and harmony.

Therefore, the sage, in harmony with the Law of Nature,

Knows himself but does not flaunt his knowledge,

Loves himself but does not exalt his status,

Accepts where he is without complaint,

Enjoys what he does without dislike.

Thus, he rejects imbalance and disharmony,

And chooses balance and harmony.

When people revolt,

Governmental prestige ends.

The ruler should always bear this in mind:

Never narrow the roads of life;

Never cause people to be dissatisfied with their existence.

For, satisfied with life,

None would revolt against the government.

The moral for the ruler is:

Know one's own shortcomings

Instead of being occupied with one's own views.

Appreciate others' appreciation

Instead of imposing one's self upon others.

That is how the wise person makes choices.

When the people have no more fear of oppression; that is when oppressive forces will overtake them.

Do not restrict the people in their dwellings.

Do not oppress the people with heavy taxes and burdens.

If you do not wear the people out, they will not weary of you.

Therefore it is that sages know themselves well, but this self-knowledge is not displayed for all to see.

The sage respects himself, but does not try to become admired.

He will choose self-knowledge and love, and set conceit and opinion aside.

