===== Chapter 27 =====

Good traveling is without tracks or footprints.

Good speech is without faulting or blaming.

Good counting does not use tallying methods.

Good closing is without bars or locks and cannot be opened.

Good binding is without ropes or restraints and cannot be unfastened.

Therefore, the sages

Are always good at helping people—

Consequently, they do not cast people aside.

Are always good at helping the physical world—

Consequently, they do not cast the physical world aside.

This is called "entering enlightenment."

Therefore, those who are good

Are the teachers of those who are not good.

Those who are not good

Are the resources of those who are good.

Not valuing one's teachers

Not loving one's resources

Even though [one may be] intelligent

[One is nevertheless] greatly confused.

This is called an essential subtlety.

Good travelers leave no tracks. Good words leave no trace. Good counting needs no markers.

Good doors have no bolts Yet cannot be forced. Good knots have no rope But cannot be untied.

In this way the Sage Always helps people And rejects none, Always helps
all beings, And rejects none. This is called practicing brightness.

Therefore the good person is the bad person's teachers, And the bad person Is the good person's resource.

Not to value the teacher, Not to love the resource, Causes great
confusion even for the intelligent. This is called the vital secret.

Those who are good at walking

Leave no tracks in the ground.

Those who are good at speaking

Speak without flaws.

Those who are good at counting

Require no tally.

Those who are good at shutting

Use no locks

Yet whatever they close

Cannot be opened.

Those who are good at tying

Use no ropes

Yet whatever they tie

Cannot be untied.

Thus the sage is always good at taking care of people

And abandons no one.

He's always good at looking after things

And abandons nothing.

This is called

Following what's bright.

The good are the teachers of those who are not good.

Those who are not good are the raw material for the good.

Those who do not respect their teachers

And don't care for their resources

However clever they may be, they're utterly confused.

This is called the essence of mystery.

THE PERFECT

Running perfectly, Neither track nor trace is seen.

Speaking perfectly, Neither slip nor flaw.

Calculating perfectly, Neither tally nor counter is needed.

The perfect door, needing neither bolt nor bar, Cannot be opened.

The perfect knot, needing neither rope nor twine

Cannot be untied.

Thus the Sage, Perfect in helping humankind, No one is rejected nor abandoned.

Perfect in caring for All Things, Nothing is laid waste nor discarded.

In so doing, cunningly secures knowledge of the laws of nature,

And uses this knowledge in a Wu-Wei manner

Therefore:

As the perfect is the teacher of the imperfect,

The imperfect is a valuable experience for the perfect.

Either teacher - either student,

Not honoring the teacher,

Not loving and caring for the student,

Though learned and wise,

Is deluded and deceived.

Such is the subtle mystery.

Good practices leave no trace of a rut.

Good words do not find fault.

Good plans are not calculated.

Good doors have no bolt or bar, yet cannot be opened.

Good bindings have no ties, yet cannot be loosened.

The sage is always good at embracing people because they do not abandon people.

They are always good at embracing all of life because they do not reject anything.

This is called following the light.

The good person is the bad person's teacher.

The bad person is the good person's lesson.

When the student does not value their teacher, they become cunning and very confused. They cannot cherish their lessons.

This is called the essential mystery.

SKILL IN THE METHOD

The experienced traveler concealeth his tracks; the clever speaker giveth

no chance to the critic; the skilled mathematician useth no abacus; the

ingenious safesmith baffleth the burglar without the use of bolts, and

the cunning binder without ropes and knots. So also the sage, skilled in

man-emancipation-craft, useth all men; understanding the value of everything,

he rejecteth nothing. This is called the Occult Regimen.

The
adept is then master to the zelator, and the zelator assisteth and

honoreth the adept. Yet unless these relations were manifest, even the

most intelligent observer might be perplexed as to which was which. This

is called the Crown of Mystery.

An experienced wanderer needs neither guideposts nor paths. A goodmathematician needs no counting board. A good orator needs no false arguments.A good locksmith needs no key. The Sage is a good helper of man and neverdespairs. Such is his enlightenment. The Sage is the teacher of the confused,and values his pupil. Who does not honor his teacher, Who does not valuehis pupil, lacks wisdom in spite of his knowledge. Such is true Spirituality.

A true traveller never takes a beaten road

A true speaker has an answer to every question

A true researcher has solved all problems

A story that holds water needs no confirmation

Nobody can refute a watertight story

One who sees how perfectly everything is connected with everything

Needs no theories or opinions, and no one can bring him to doubt

That's why a true human being is a teacher of others

And he loves his fellow men unconditionally

Therefore he is shepherd of the whole creation

And respects every thing that lives and grows

People call this: "The light that has become human"

Therefore a true human being is a mirror for the untrue

And it's his task to point out their imperfections

One who is scared to take a look at oneself and does not love oneself

Might know a lot of things, but he is blind

It seems odd, but it's true

The wise traveler has no need to retrace his steps. The effective speaker does not need to repeat himself. The generous trader needs no scales.

The self-closing door needs no bolt, for it will not open itself even though it is not forced to stay shut. Things which go together naturally do not have to be tied; for they will not separate even without bonds.

Therefore the intelligent man expresses his beneficence to other men by accepting each man's own way as best for himself. And he performs the same service for all other beings, for he willingly recognizes that, by following its own nature, each thing does the best that can be done for it.

This may be called the two-pronged lesson: Bad men can learn from the good man's successes. Good men can learn from the bad man's failures.

Whoever despises such teachers, whether good or bad, or who fails to appreciate such lessons, Even though he may be a "walking encyclopedia," is really a misguided fool. This is the secret of wisdom.

Perfect activity leaves no track behind it;

Perfect speech is like a jade-worker whose tool leaves no mark.

The perfect reckoner needs no counting-slips;

The perfect door has neither bolt nor bar,

Yet cannot be opened.

The perfect knot needs neither rope nor twine,

Yet cannot be united.

Therefore the Sage

Is all the time in the most perfect way helping men,

He certainly does not turn his back on men;

Is all the time in the most perfect way helping creatures,

He certainly does not turn his back on creatures.

This is called resorting to the Light.

Truly, "the perfect man is the teacher of the imperfect;

But the imperfect is the stock-in-trade of the perfect man".

He who does not respect his teacher,

He who does not take care of his stock-in-trade,

Much learning through he may possess, is far astray.

This is the essential secret.

A good walker leaves no tracks.

A good speaker does not slip up.

A good accountant needs no counter.

A good doorsmith uses no bolts or locks

yet none can open what he closes.

A good binder uses no knots

yet what he binds cannot be unraveled.

The sage is good at saving souls and rejects no one.

He takes care of all things and abandons nothing.

This is called "the way of awareness."

The good man is the ignorant man's teacher.

The ignorant man is the good man's lesson.

To not honor the teacher and value the lesson—

no matter how much wisdom one acquires—

is to miss the mark.

This is an essential secret.

The able wanderer leaves no trail (or) trace

The able speaker is without fallacy (or) error

The able reckoner does not use counting devices

The best closure uses no barrier (or) bar

And yet is not easily opened

The best binding uses no cord (or) knot

And yet is not easily loosened

And so it is that wise ones

Are ever so skilled at making the most of others

That no person is forsaken

Are ever so skilled at making the most of situations

That no situation is wasted

This may be called "practical wisdom"

And so the able one is the less than able one's teacher

The less than able one is the able one's resource

To not value one's teacher, to not care for one's resource,

However "prudent" is greatly deluded

This may be called a "tactical mystery"

Attention

A good walker leaves no track behind;

A good speaker makes no slips;

A good reckoner needs no tally.

A good closer of doors needs no bolt or lock,

And yet no one can open it.

Good binding of knots requires no rope or cord,

Yet no one can loosen it.

Therefore the sage is constantly good

In taking care of all men

And never rejects anyone;

Constantly good in taking care of things;

And never rejects useful goods;

This is called "Doubly bright".

Therefore the good man is the teacher of the good

And the bad man is the raw material for the good.

Do not value one's teacher

And do not cherish the raw goods-

Though one had great knowledge,

He would still be greatly confused.

This is called the essential of the sublime.

A good runner leaves no tracks; A good speaker makes no slips; A good planner doesn't have to scheme.

The best lock has no bolt, and no one can open it. The best knot uses no rope, and no one can untie it.

Thus the master is always good at saving people, and doesn't abandon anyone; Always good at saving things, and doesn't waste anything. This is known as "Following the light."

What is a good man but a bad man's teacher? What is a bad man but a good man's charge?

It doesn't matter how smart you are if you don't have the sense to honour your teachers and cherish your responsibilities. This is an essential teaching of Tao.

Treading correctly, we leave no trace.

Correct speech is brief and true.

Correct assessment is ever open-

Calculation does not further it.

The true-fitting door is shut fast

Without need of bar or latch-

Yet none can break its seal,

Or cross its threshold.

The best knots tie firmly,

Yet without binding: such connections

Can never be broken from outside.

Thus the eternal Sage

Acts with abiding care for all.

Because of this, it abandons no one:

Its regenerative Presence flows

Through every particle of being.

This is called the penetrating awareness.

Thus the Sage approaches those who lack fulfillment:

For those who lack fulfillment sustain the Cosmic teachings:

The Teacher and student unite in what is learned.

Accept this fully-for if you fail-

Success will forever elude you,

However great your erudition.

This is why I call this

The heart of my teaching.

This is a distinctive chapter in the Tao Te Ching for several reasons. It begins with a beautifully lucid set of metaphors on speech and action that are in harmony with Tao.

Lao Tzu follows these with an image of a "true-fitting door" which can close securely "without need of bar or latch." In the I Ching, the first line of Hexagram 60, Limitation, speaks of "not going out of the door" as a metaphor on the true self's ability to separate itself from the distorting beliefs and restrictive rules of the collective ego. In both of these texts, the point being made is that it is not a matter of fleeing from, or contending against, the repressive power of group ideology, but rather of simply having a proper inner seal on the doorway of consciousness, so that the vapid abstractions and insinuations of ego can find no entry point to one's true self.

In the second half of the poem, Lao Tzu considers the source of help available to people who would like to live, work, and form relationships from a stable, open center of being: the Cosmic Sage—the teaching energy of the universe. The Sage is available to all who ask for its help; it is a regenerative presence that can awaken and further understanding and awareness, because it works with the student, and not from above him. When we accept the help of the Sage in living a human life, we are guided toward fulfillment. This is why Lao Tzu declares that this is "the heart of my teaching."

A good traveler has no need to leave tracks;

a good speaker leaves no grounds for rebuttal;

a good trader needs no scales, no computer;

a good door needs no latch to remain shut;

a good fastener needs no rope to perfect its bond.

The
truly wise are helpful to people.

No one is rejected.

The truly wise are helpful to everything.

Nothing is rejected.

This is double enlightenment.

Therefore
the good teach the bad;

the bad are lessons for the good.

Whoever dislikes such a teacher,

who dislikes such lessons,

may appear learning but is misguided.

This is the subtlety of true wisdom.

Good doers leave no tracks. True words have no defects. Skillful plans require no calculations. Able closers need no locks and bars, yet none can open what they shut. Real strength wants no cords, yet none can loose it.

It follows that the Holy Man when helping others, works in accordance with the unchanging goodness.

Hence, he rejects none. He does the same when helping nature to develop. Therefore, he rejects nothing.

This may be called "obscure perception."

Thus a Good Man is the bad man's instructor; the bad man the Good Man's material. Yet he does not esteem himself a teacher, nor does he love his material.

Although one may be wise, here he is deceived.

This is called "The Cardinal Mystery."

A good traveler leaves no track; A good speaker leaves no error; A good reckoner needs no counter;

A good closer needs no bars or bolts, And yet it is impossible to open after him. A good fastener needs no cords or knots, And yet it is impossible to untie after him.

Even if men be bad, why should they be rejected? Therefore the Sage is always a good saviour of men, And no man is rejected; He is a good saviour of things, And nothing is rejected: This is called double enlightenment.

Therefore good men are had men's instructors, And bad men are good men's materials.

Those who do not esteem their instructors, And those who do not love their materials, Though expedient, are in fact greatly confused. This is essential subtlety.

Paradoxes of the Greatest Skill

Worthy travel lacks ruts and footprints.

Worthy language lacks flaws and reproach.

Worthy tallying doesn't use algorithms.

Worthy closing lacks bars and bolts

and still can't be opened.

Worthy securing lacks rope or restraint

and still can't be loosed.

Using this: Sages take saving humanity as a constant

hence don't abandon humans

take saving thing-kinds as a constant,

therefore don't abandon thing-kinds.

Call this 'bushwhacking discernment.'

Hence those who are worthy

are the instructors of the unworthy

The unworthy

are the stuff of the worthy.

'Don't value their instructor,

don't love their stuff'

Even the wise are greatly puzzled

Call this "the necessary mystery."

The best action is free from marks [either good or evil].

The best words are free from stains [either good or bad].

The best calculator is free from calculation and measure.

The best closure has no bolts, yet it cannot be opened.

The best knot has no cord, yet it cannot be untied.

Thus, the wise knows how to rescue men; hence, no one is excluded.

He also knows how to rescue things; hence, nothing is excluded.

This is called penetration to illumination.

Therefore, the virtuous is the model for the unvirtuous.

The unvirtuous is the origin of the virtuous.

If one does not appreciate the virtuous or cherish the unvirtuous,

Although one is intelligent, one is not free from confusion.

This is called the indispensable wonder.

He who knows how to travel does not leave any trace.

He who knows how to use words does not make any errors.

He who knows stratagems needs not any plans.

He who knows how to lock uses no bolts, yet what has been locked cannot be opened.

He who knows how to tie uses no rope, yet what has been tied cannot be released.

Therefore the sage always knows how to take care of people, and so no one is abandoned.

He knows how to take care of all things, and so no thing is abandoned.

This is what is called following discernment.

That is why good men are the teachers of bad men, and bad men are the sources of warning of good men.

Not to value the teacher, not to care for the sources,

this reveals foolishness, however clever one may be.

This is the essential secret.

A good traveler leaves neither ruts nor footprints;

A good speaker makes neither slips nor errors;

A good calculator uses neither wooden chips nor bamboo chips;

A good door-shutter has neither latch nor lock,

Yet, the door he shuts cannot be opened;

A good knot-tier has neither rope nor string,

Yet, the knot he ties cannot be untied.

Hence, the sage man

Was constantly good at rescuing men

So that there were no cast-off men;

As for things,

There were no cast-off goods.

This is called surpassing insight.

Hence, good men are good men's teachers;

Evil men, good men's wealth.

He who neither values his teachers,

Nor cherishes his wealth,

Though crafty, is but a big fool.

This is called subtle essence.

The good traveler leaves no tracks,

The good speaker leaves no doubt,

The good accountant needs no abacus,

The good builder needs no lock and bolt,

And the door he closes will not open behind him.

The good fastener needs no ropes or knots,

And it is still impossible to untie after him.

Even if people are bad, why should they be rejected?

Therefore the sage is always the good savior of the people,

And nobody will reject him.

He is good to all creatures,

He spurns nothing.

This state is called "to see and to come to the light."

Therefore, good people are guides to bad people,

And many people are like matter in good people's hands.

And the person who does not appreciate his guide,

And the person who does not love the matter in his hand,

All their success comes from blindness.

This is the main principle of the secret.

One who excels in travelling leaves no wheel tracks;

One who excels in speech makes no slips;

One who excels in reckoning uses no counting rods;

One who excels in shutting uses no bolts yet what he has shut cannot be opened.

One who excels in tying uses no cords yet what he has tied cannot be undone.

Therefore
the sage always excels in saving people, and so abandons no one;

Always excels in saving things, and so abandons nothing.

This
is called following one's discernment.

Hence
the good man is the teacher the bad learns from;

And the bad man is the material the good works on.

Not to value the teacher

Nor to love the material

Though it seems clever, betrays great bewilderment.

This
is called the essential and the secret.

The Function of Skill

"Good travelers leave no trace nor track,

Good speakers, in logic show no lack,

Good counters need no counting rack.

"Good lockers bolting bars need not,

Yet none their locks can loose.

Good binders need no string nor knot,

Yet none unties their noose."

Therefore the holy man is always a good saviour of men, for there are no outcast people. He is always a good saviour of things, for there are no outcast things. This is called applied enlightenment.

Thus the good man does not respect multitudes of men. The bad man respects the people's wealth. Who does not esteem multitudes nor is charmed by their wealth, though his knowledge be greatly confused, he must be recognized as profoundly spiritual.

The master travels the natural path, which has no destination, and on which no tracks can be left. A good trader follows the market wherever it goes. A good teacher lets the students guide him. A master is present for all, both saints and sinners. All situations are used and nothing is dismissed. This is called spreading the light. A man, who considers himself good, must be intimate with that which is bad. A man, who considers himself bad, must know the good. Therefore the master sees no distinction between the two. For this reason the master and disciple are equal.

A good traveler leaves no trails;

A good speaker allows no slips;

A good planner needs no tallies;

A good carpenter needs no bolts in securing a door from opening;

A good packager needs no strings in preventing a knot from untying.

Thus,

the sage cares for everyone and abandons no one,

cares for everything and abandons nothing.

This is unrevealed wisdom.

Thus,

a good person serves as the teacher to a not-so-good person;

a not-so-good person serves as the mirror to a good person.

One who neither respects one's teacher nor cares for one's mirror, even if wise, will be bewildered.

This is the innermost intricacy.

Perfect travels leave no tracks.

Perfect words leave no doubts.

Perfect accounts need no counting.

Perfect gates close without locks and so cannot be opened.

Perfect knots bind without rope and so cannot be loosened.

A sage is always perfect in rescuing people and so abandons no one,

always perfect in rescuing things and so abandons nothing.

This is called the bequest of enlightenment,

so one who possesses this perfection is a teacher of those who don't,

and those who don't possess it are the resource of one who does.

Without honoring the teacher

and loving the resource,

no amount of wisdom can prevent vast confusion.

This is called the essential mystery.

An excellent walker leaves no track;

An excellent speech contains no flaw;

An excellent reckoner uses no counter;

A well-shut door uses no mechanism, yet none can open it;

A well-tied know uses no rope, yet none can untie it.

Similarly,

The sage always excels in saving people, thus there is no useless people.

The sage always excels in saving things, thus there is no abandoned thing.

This is called the innate enlightenment.

It follows that:

A superior person if the teacher of the lesser person, and

The lesser person provides lessons for the superior person.

The person who does not value his teacher, nor care about the lessons,

Is deeply confused despite the person's intelligence.

This is an important subtlety.

Valuing
going is absent of trace

Valuing words are absent of flaw or censure

With valuing reckoning, counters or policies are not used.

What
is valuably shut

Is absent of a barrier yet cannot be opened

What is valuably tied

Is absent of restraint or restriction yet cannot be untied.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Entirely valuing help others, so others are not thrown away

Entirely valuing help things, so things are not thrown away.

Appropriately called following the luminance.

So
those who value others teach those who lack valuing others

Those who lack valuing others are a resource of those who
value others.

Without treasuring a teacher, or without loving a resource

Even the wise have great misconception.

Appropriately
called an important subtlety.

A good walker leaves no trace, a good speaker offends no one, a good reckoner needs no tally,

an expert locksmith can make one that no one can open, an expert on knots can make them so that no one can untie them. (all specialists have their speciality, which makes their fame, from which they take their profit).

Likewise the Sage (Confucian politician), the professional saviour of men and things, has his own procedures.

He considers himself as the born master of other men, regarding them as material born for his craft. Now that is to blind oneself, (to shade out the light, the Daoist principles).

Not wishing to rule, nor to appropriate, others; although wise, seeming like a madman (persisting to live in retreat); this is the essential truth.

Good traveling does not leave tracks

Good speech does not seek faults

Good reckoning does not use counters

Good closure needs no bar and yet cannot be opened

Good knot needs no rope and yet cannot be untied

Therefore sages often save others

And so do not abandon anyone

They often save things

And so do not abandon anything

This is called following enlightenment

Therefore the good person is the teacher of the bad person

The bad person is the resource of the good person

The one who does not value his teachers

And does not love his resources

Although intelligent, he is greatly confused

This is called the essential wonder

Skilled travelers in the journey of life follow the path of nature. They do not force their way through obstacles or trample over the paths of other travelers. Therefore, they leave no signs of their passing. Similarly, those who are skillful in the art of conversation do not use words to highlight the faults of others. Such actions breed contention - and conflicts leave many tracks indeed!

There are those who are good at capturing people's attention, imagination, and heart. They do not need to lock people in to keep them around. People would naturally not wish to leave. They can also be skillful in bonding with people. When they have connected with people at a deep level, it is a bond that is stronger than any knots tied with ropes.

This is how sages deal with people. Because of their genuine virtue, they maintain a captive audience without having to physically force anyone to be present. They cherish everyone and all things, and it becomes clear to the people that the sage would never abandon them. This is part of the powerful bond that the sage naturally establishes with others.

One reason why sages don't give up on anyone is that everyone plays a role in the overall stage of life. Everyone has an impact on everyone else, and it is up to an individual to make use of that impact. A good person can serve as a teacher and be a great example for us to emulate. Not-so-good individuals is just as useful, because we can observe the negative consequences of their negative actions, and learn from that as what not to do.

In this way, the sages see everyone as valuable teachers or resources. They do not praise the good people and condemn the bad, because they feel genuine love and affection for all of them. Most of us are not quite that way - we quickly develope likes and dislikes, preferences and aversions in dealing with others. We lack the ability to deal everyone with the same degree of universal love that sages possess; we can only look upon this essential aspect of their character with a sense of wonder.

Perhaps one day, when we have reached a certain level of cultivation, we can also possess the essential wonder of universal love. When that happens, we will no longer see people we despise - only people who represent certain aspects of the greater oneness that is also us.

THE FUNCTION OF SKILL

Good walkers leave no tracks, good speakers make no errors, good counters need no abacus, good wardens have no need for bolts and locks for no one can get by them. Good binders can dispense with rope and cord, yet none can unloose their hold.

Therefore the wise man trusting in goodness always saves men, for there is no outcast to him. Trusting in goodness he saves all things for there is nothing valueless to him. This is recognizing concealed values.

Therefore the good man is the instructor of the evil man, and the evil man is the good man's wealth. He who does not esteem his instructors or value his wealth, though he be otherwise intelligent, becomes confused. Herein lies the significance of spirituality.

Good (shan) running leaves no tracks,

Good speech has no flaws,

Good counting uses no counters,

A good lock uses no bolts yet cannot be opened,

A good knot uses no rope yet cannot be untied.

Hence the sage is always good at saving people,

Therefore no one is rejected.

He is always good at saving things,

Therefore nothing is rejected.

This is called following the light (ming).

Therefore the good person,

Is the not-good (pu-shan) person's teacher.

The not-good (pu-shan) person,

Is the good person's capital.

One who does not honor (kuei) the teacher,

Or love (ai) the capital,

Is greatly confounded though knowledgeable (chih).

This is called the important mystery (miao).

A good traveler has no need to leave tracks; a good speaker leaves no grounds for rebuttal; a good trader needs no scales, no computer; a good door needs no latch to remain shut; a good fastener needs no rope to perfect its bond.

The truly wise are helpful to people. No one is rejected. The truly wise are helpful to everything. Nothing is rejected. They are a friend to the friendless, a hope to the hopeless. This is double enlightenment.

Therefore the good teach the bad; the bad are lessons for the good. Whoever dislikes such a teacher, who dislikes such a lesson, may appear learned but is misguided. This is the subtlety of true wisdom.

Following the Tao, the Tao–Master leaves no tracks,

speaks without error, counts without markers.

No locks on his door, and yet no one can open it.

No rope used, and yet his knots cannot be untied.

Thus, the Tao–Master cares for all beings and neglects none.

Thus, he follows the light.

The Tao–Master teaches the fool; and thus the fool learns.

But teaching and learning will not take place

unless the student values the teacher

and the teacher loves the student.

This is the subtle secret of teaching and learning.

Twenty-seven

A good walker leaves no tracks;

A good speaker makes no slips;

A good reckoner needs no tally.

A good door needs no lock,

Yet no one can open it.

Good binding requires no knots,

Yet no one can loosen it.

Therefore the sage takes care of all men

And abandons no one.

He takes care of all things

And abandons nothing.

This
is called "following the light."

What
is a good man?

A teacher of a bad man.

What is a bad man?

A good man's charge.

If the teacher is not respected,

And the student not cared for,

Confusion will arise, however clever one is.

This is the crux of mystery.

He who is good at walking leaves no traces;

He who is good at speaking leaves no slips;

He who is good at counting uses no counting tools;

He who is good at shutting renders all efforts of opening in vain though he uses no bolts;

He who is good at tying renders all efforts of untying in vain though he uses no ropes.

That is why the sage

Is always good at saving people

And abandoning no one;

That is why the sage is always good at saving things

And abandoning nothing.

This is called the intrinsic wisdom.

Thus the good man is the bad man's teacher;

The bad man is the material from which the good draws lessons.

If honouring not one's teacher,

Or loving not one's material,

One is a big fool though he seems clever.

Here lies the vital secret.

Perfect going leaves no tracks.

Perfect speech has no flaws.

Perfect counting uses no counters.

The perfect lock uses no bolt; it is impossible to open.

The perfect knot uses no rope; it is impossible to untie.

Therefore the sage

Is always perfect in delivering people from distress.

Thus he abandons no one.

He is always perfect in delivering creatures from distress.

Thus he abandons no creature.

This is called following the light.

Therefore the perfect man

Is the leader of the imperfect man;

The imperfect man

Is the asset of the perfect man.

He who does not treasure his leader,

He who does not cherish his asset,

Though he may be wise, is greatly deluded.

This is called the fundamental secret.

A good traveller leaves no tracks.

A good debater never makes a slip.

A good strategist does not require chips to formulate a plan.

A good leader does not confine his men to ensure that they stay.

A good employer does not need rope to bind his men to their jobs.

Therefore, the sage always assists but never abandons people.

He always aids all creatures and he never forsakes them.

This is called "covert enlightenment".

While a good person could be a bad person's teacher,

A bad person could provide a salutary lesson to a good person.

A learned person remains a befuddled one if he neither values the teacher nor learns from this salutary lesson.

The subtlety of Dao can only be appreciated by an intuitive mind.

Skillful Application

Ch'iao Yung

A good walker leaves no traces behind;

A good speaker leaves no blemishes for criticism;

A good counter does not use counting chips;

A good lock has no bolt, yet cannot be opened;

A good knot has no string, yet cannot be untied.

Thus the Sage (in his silent and subtle way)

Is always good in saving people,

Thereby leaving no people unsaved;

And always good in saving things,

Thereby leaving nothing unsaved.

This is called "Passing the light."

Hence the good man is the teacher of the bad,

And the bad is object lesson for the good.

He who does not honor his teacher,

Nor loves any object lesson,

Is lost in a great maze, clever though he may be.

Such is called Significant Subtlety.

The perfect traveller leaves no tracks behind him;

The perfect speaker leaves no cause for error;

The perfect reckoner has no need of counters;

The perfect watchman has no need of bolts or bars,

Yet none can open the door;

The perfect binder has no need of cords or twine,

Yet none can unfasten after him.

Thus it is with the Sage:

He is always the perfect saviour of men;

By him is no man rejected.

He is always the perfect saviour of creatures;

By him is no creature rejected.

His method is called the Twofold Enlightenment.

He makes the perfect man the instructor of the imperfect;

The imperfect man is the ,aterial used by the perfect.

He who does not esteem his instructor,

He who does not love his material,

Is, nonwithstanding all his learning, deluded.

In this resides the fundamental secret.

Good walkers leave no tracks:

Good speakers make no points;

Good reckoners use no counters.

Good lockers turn no keys,

Yet no one opens their locks.

Good binders tie no ropes,

Yet no one undoes their knots.

What is more,

The sage is always good at saving men:

No one is cast out.

He is also good at saving things:

No thing is cast out.

Call this following the light.

Hence good men teach the not good.

Not-good men are the lessons of the good.

Not to esteem the teacher,

Not to love the lesson,

Is to go astray despite great learning.

Call this the subtle secret.

One who is good at running leaves no tracks.

One who is good at talking has no flaws in his speech.

One who is good at calculating makes no use of counting tools.

One who is good at shutting things makes no use of bolt and bar, yet no one can open what he has shut.

One who is good at tying makes no use of cords and knots, yet no one can untie what he has fastened.

One of natural, integral virtue is good at helping all people impartially.

Thus, no one is abandoned.

Because he is good at protecting and preserving all things,

nothing is ever thrown away.

This is called "embodying the light of the subtle truth."

Hence, the people on the Universal Integral Way are teachers of those off the Way.

However, if the student does not value the teacher,

and the teacher does not tend the student well,

though they both may be intelligent enough,

this leads only to further separation.

XXVII.

Employing
Skill

The
skillful traveler leaves no trace behind him,

The
skillful speaker says nothing that falsely jars,

The
skillful counter keeps no checks to remind him,

The
skillful locker requires no bolts or bars,

And
the skillful binder no cords, or knots or strings,

Yet
to afterwards open or loose are impossible things.

So
the sage in his goodness is ever a saver of men,

No
man
he rejects or loses,

And
alike in his goodness a saver of things, for then

He
everything saves and uses,

And
this is the inner enlightenment again,

Which
comprehends and chooses.

So
the good instructs the bad, the bad in turn

Is
material for the good; and not to prize

One s
own instructor, not to love, but spurn

One s
own material, would confuse the wise.

This
mutual help and love make all men kin,

And
mark the spirit-uk divine, within.

He who walks in goodness leaves his trace in the Inner Life.

He who speaks in goodness carries no blame to the Inner Life.

He who reckons in goodness does not need to use a tally.

The good man has power to close the inner door and no one can open it.

The good man has power to tie the inner knot and no one can untie it.

That is why the self-controlled man always uses goodness in helping men, thus he draws them to the Inner Life.

He always uses goodness in helping creatures, thus he draws them to the Inner Life.

This is called being doubly illuminated.

Therefore the good man masters the man who is not good,

And the man who is not good is helper to the good man.

He who does not honour his master,

He who does not love his helper,

Though counted wise, is greatly deceived.

This is called important and mysterious.

Good
walking leaves

no
track behind it,

but
the walking was true;

Good
speech leaves

no
mark to be picked at,

but
the speech was true;

Good
calculation makes

no
use of counting-slips,

yet
the counting is true;

Good
shutting makes

no
use of bolt and bar,

And
yet nobody can undo it;

Good
tying makes

no
use of rope and knot,

And
yet nobody can untie it.

The
Complete Thinker is

always
good at saving humans,

And
nobody is abandoned;

Always
good at savings things,

And
nothing is wasted.

This
is called

"following
the guidance of the Insight."

Good
humans are the

teachers
of destructive humans,

Destructive
humans

depend
on constructive humans.

Not
to honor one's teacher,

Not
to value one's dependent,

Is
to be on the wrong road,

however
intelligent one may be.

This
is call the Important Not Obvious .

For a skilful traveller there are neither tracks nor traces.

For a skilful speaker there is neither blame nor praise.

A skilful reckoner used no counting-tallies.

A skilful 'closer' does not bar or bolt; yet to open (what he has shut) would be impossible.

A skilful binder does not twine or know; yet to loosen (what he has bound) would be impossible.

Thus the Saint is constantly good at saving men. Even of the not-good, who will be rejected?

He is constantly good at saving things: for he acts without rejecting things. This is called a twofold understanding. For a good man is the master of the not-good, and the not-good are the material for the good. However wise one may be, not to value one\s master, or not to be sparing of one's material, is a great error. This is called the chief wonder.

The skilful traveller leaves no traces of his wheels or

footsteps; the skilful speaker says nothing that can be found fault

with or blamed; the skilful reckoner uses no tallies; the skilful

closer needs no bolts or bars, while to open what he has shut will be

impossible; the skilful binder uses no strings or knots, while to

unloose what he has bound will be impossible. In the same way the

sage is always skilful at saving men, and so he does not cast away any

man; he is always skilful at saving things, and so he does not cast

away anything. This is called 'Hiding the light of his procedure.'

Therefore
the man of skill is a master (to be looked up to) by him

who has not the skill; and he who has not the skill is the helper of

(the reputation of) him who has the skill. If the one did not honour

his master, and the other did not rejoice in his helper, an

(observer), though intelligent, might greatly err about them. This is

called 'The utmost degree of mystery.'

A skillful woodsman leaves neither tracks nor traces;
a skillful speaker
is quite flawless in their delivery;
a master mathematician needs neither
tallies nor counters;
a master joiner needs neither lock nor key, yet their
work cannot be opened;
a master binder needs neither rope nor cord, yet what
they bind is permanent.
Therefore,
Super-Egos are always expert at saving others, and abandon none;
nor do they
miss the chance to serve. This is called 'Inmost Sincerity.'
Therefore,
'good people' are teachers for 'good people,'
'bad people' are foils in the
Super-Ego's hand.
One who values not their teacher and loves not their foils,

though they be quite 'knowledgeable,' is nonetheless greatly deluded.
This
is what is called 'the Mystic Essential.'

Can
you walk and leave no tracks?

Make no errors when you talk?

Count without a tally?

Secure a door without a lock?

You
can abandon no one

There's nothing you can leave behind

In you there are no limits

You are forever unconfined

What
happens is spontaneous

Good and bad are just the same

In origin identical

Beyond both praise and blame

GOOD walking leaves no track behind it;

Good speech leaves no mark to be picked at;

Good calculation makes no use of counting-slips;

Good shutting makes no use of bolt and bar,

And yet nobody can undo it;

Good tying makes no use of rope and knot,

And yet nobody can untie it.

Hence, the Sage is always good at saving men,

And therefore nobody is abandoned;

Always good at saving things,

And therefore nothing is wasted.

This is called "following the guidance of the Inner Light."

Hence, good men are teachers of bad men,

While bad men are the charge of good men.

Not to revere one's teacher,

Not to cherish one's charge,

Is to be on the wrong road, however intelligent one may be.

This is an essential tenet of the Tao.

The sage follows the natural way.

Like an experienced tracker...he himself leaves no tracks.

Like a good speaker...his language lacks flaws and rebuke.

Like an experienced counter he needs no calculator.

He is like a well-made door, which needs no lock.

He is the perfect knot, leaving no end to be unraveled.

He attends to every detail.

It is in this way that the sage is skilful at saving men,

and so he does not cast away any man.

He is always skilful at saving things, and so he does not cast away anything.

This is called embodying the light.

It is in this way that the skillful master is the teacher of the one without skill.

And the one without skill is the charge and responsibility of the master.

From the teachings of the master, all might learn who wish to listen.

Not respecting the teacher, nor valuing the student, you will see confusion, no matter how intelligent you are.

This is called the Essential Subtlety.

A good traveler leaves no tracks,

and a skillful speaker is well rehearsed.

A good bookkeeper has an excellent memory,

and a well made door is easy to open and needs no locks.

A good knot needs no rope and it can not come undone.

Thus
the Master is willing to help everyone,

and doesn't know the meaning of rejection.

She is there to help all of creation,

and doesn't abandon even the smallest creature.

This is called embracing the light.

What
is a good person but a bad person's teacher?

What is a bad person but raw material for his teacher?

If you fail to honor your teacher or fail to enjoy your student,

you will become deluded no matter how smart you are.

It is the secret of prime importance.

An experienced leader does not need a packaged tour to go places safely.

A good political speech does not need to make promises or antagonize the crowd.

A good mathematician does not need a computer to solve every problem.

A secure home does not have bolts and bars and locks and alarms everywhere, yet a burglar cannot get inside.

The wise leader's ability does not rest on techniques or gimmicks or set exercises. The method of awareness-of-process applies to all people and all situations.

The leader's personal state of consciousness creates a climate of openness. Center and ground give the leader stability, flexibility, and endurance.

Because the leader sees clearly, the leader can shed light on others.

The group members need the leader for guidance and facilitation. The leader needs people to work with, people to serve. If both do not recognize the mutual need to love and respect one another, each misses the point.

They miss the creativity of the student-teacher polarity. They do not see how things happen.

A skillful walker leaves no tracks.

A skillful speaker makes no mistakes.

A skillful accountant needs no counting-devices.

A well-made door needs no lock, yet cannot be opened.

A well-made binding uses no rope, yet will not be undone.

Therefore, the Sage is always there to help people

So that no one is forsaken.

She is always there to see to things

So that nothing is lost.

This is called being clothed in light.

What is a good person but a bad person's teacher?

What is a bad person but raw materia for a good person?

If you do not respect your Teacher,

Or love your "raw material,"

You are greatly confused, regardless of your intelligence.

I call this an essential, yet subtle mystery.

A
proficient traveler leaves no evidence of his

journey.

A proficient speaker is impeccable in his

presentation.

A proficient accountant needs no tally sheet.

A functional door has no lock

but can only opened by the owner.

A perfect binding has no knots

yet only the binder can loosen it.

The
sage is the light of all human beings

and rejects no one.

She efficiently uses all things

and discards nothing.

This is called manifesting Infinity.

What
is a sage but a guide to peace and harmony?

What is a materialistic traveler but the

sage's focus?

For
the student not to value the teacher

or the teacher not to love the student

or for the followers not to acknowledge the

leader

or the leader not to care for the

followers,

is the cause of great confusion.

This
is a key to peace and harmony,

teachers and leaders remind others of who

they are

and their oneness with Infinity.

A good journey leaves no tracks.

A good speech has no mistakes.

Good counting uses no tally sticks.

Good closure requires no latch bolt, yet does not open.

Good joints need no rope, yet do not loosen.

Thus does the wise man help others, not forsake them;

improve things, not neglect them.

Thus is understanding passed on.

The better man is the lesser man's teacher.

The lesser man is the better man's occupation.

One who does not esteem his teacher,

one who does not cherish his profession,

though wise, will be greatly confused.

This is an important secret.

A good traveller leaves no tracks.

A good speaker cannot be refuted.

A good reckoner needs no abacus.

A good door needs neither lock nor bolt;

Yet it cannot be opened.

A good binding needs neither rope nor knots;

Yet it cannot be untied.

Therefore the Sage excels in taking care of everyone,

And no one is forgotten.

He excels in finding a use for everything,

Hence nothing is rejected.

This is called practising enlightenment.

Therefore the good man is the teacher of the bad;

And the bad man is the material upon which the good man works.

He who does not value the teacher

And cherish the subject-matter,

Regardless of his learning, has gone astray.

This is called the ultimate mystery.

A good walker leaves no trace.

A good speaker uses no blasphemy.

A good calculator uses no counting aids.

A good door-keeper needs no bars.

A good knot uses no strings.

Similarly,

A wise saver will part with no one.

A wise user will waste nothing.

It is the subtle insight that gives such abilities.

The wise person will be seen as the teacher for the unwise.

The unwise will be regarded as the resources for the wise.

One may be a mental genius,

But if he appreciates no teacher or other resources,

He is only a blundering fool.

The key is such teaching/learning.

Excellent traveling: no tracks or traces Excellent speaking: no blemish or blame. Excellent counting does not use counting slips.

Excellent locking: no bolt or bar, but the door cannot be opened. Excellent tying: no cord or rope, but the knots cannot be undone.

And so the Wise Person: Always Excels at rescuing people and so does not turn anyone away. Always Excels at resolving things and so does not turn away from anything. This is called 'being clothed in Clarity.'

The Excellent person is the teacher of the person who is not Excellent. The person who is not Excellent is material for the Excellent person.

Not to treasure one's teacher not to love one's material, though 'smart,' is a great mistake. This is an important secret.

He who knows the Path can find the right direction even if there are no traces. He who can speak does not make mistakes. He who can count does not miscount. The best treasury has no lock, yet no one can open it. The best fetters are those which bind by nothing material yet cannot be broken.

The wise can save people, and he saves them constantly. He can help and does not leave anyone in trouble without help. Thus acts the deep wisdom!

He also instructs the people of evil, and they with his help can find the Base.

But if the people of evil do not value his help and do not like the Base — the wise leaves them: he does not value communication with such people.

This principle is very important!

A good traveler doesn't leave any trace,

A good speaker is not lost in idle talk,

A good estimator isn't lost in calculations,

A door having a good locker doesn't need for another one,

Something tightened up by a good rope, doesn't need for another rope.

The
Wise Person helps everybody by his presence,

Everything around him is in the right place,

Being in the Light nothing is lost.

A
good person teaches a bad one by good examples,

A bad one teaches a good one by bad examples.

Those who don't appreciate a Wise Person and his teaching,

Live in illusion, heading towards a bitter end of actions,

Although they might be well educated.

The Wise Person's actions are very subtle.

Good
traveling leaves no ruts. Good speech gives rise to no reproach. Good reckoning
does not depend on counting slips. Good closures need no bars and yet cannot
be opened. Good bonds employ no rope and yet cannot be undone. For this reason
the Sage is always good at saving people and so none is abandoned. He is always
good at saving creatures and so none is abandoned. [This condition] is called
practicing brightness. So the good person is the teacher of those who are not
good, and people who are not good are the raw materials for those who are good.
Should one fail to value his teacher or fail to love his raw materials, then
although he might be knowledgeable, he would be yet greatly deluded. This is
spoken of as the cardinal mystery.

A good walker leaves no trail.

A good speaker leaves no grounds for blame.

A good counter needs no calculator.

A well-closed door needs no bolt

and still cannot be opened.

A well-tied knot needs no binding

and still cannot be untied.

Therefore the Sage is always able to save his people

and there is no one forsaken.

He is able to save all things

and there is nothing wasted.

This is called inherited enlightenment.

Therefore the good man is the teacher of the bad.

And the bad man is the material for the good.

He who fails to value the teacher and cherish the material,

Is utterly lost in spite of his knowledge.

This is called crucial subtlety.

The Skillful Exchange of Information

A good path has no ruts.

A good speech has no flaws.

A good analysis uses no schemes.

A good lock has no bar or bolt,

And yet it cannot be opened.

A good knot does not restrain,

And yet it cannot be unfastened.

Thus Evolved Individuals are always good at saving others;

Hence no one is wasted.

They are always good at saving things;

Hence nothing is Wasted.

This is called Doubling the LIght.

Therefore a good person is teh teacher of an inferior person;

And an inferior person is teh resource of a good person.

One who does not treasure a teacher, or does not cherish a resource,

Although intelligent, is greatly deluded.

This is called Significant Subtlety.

Wander the lands with no intent on getting somewhere. Accept anyone the knocks on your door. Give your sandals to someone that would steal them. The bad that do not value the good, and the good that do not love the bad are lost and confused. This is the essential wonder.

A good runner leaves no tracks.

A good speech has no flaws to censure.

A good computer uses no tallies.

A good door is well shut without bolts and cannot be opened.

A good knot is tied without rope and cannot be loosed.

The
Wise Man is always good at helping people,

so that none are cast out;

he is always good at saving things,

so that none are thrown away.

This is called applied intelligence.

Surely
the good man is the bad man's teacher;

and the bad man is the good man's business.

If the one does not respect his teacher,

or the other doesn't love his business,

his error is very great.

This
is indeed an important secret.

One who is skilled at travelling leaves no traces of his wheels or footsteps;

One who is skilled at speaking says nothing that can be found fault with;

One who is skilled at counting uses no tallies;

One who is skilled as closing needs no bolts, while it is impossible to open what he has shut.

One who is skilled at binding has no strings, while it is impossible to undo what he has bound.

Therefore the sage is always skillful at saving men,

And so no man is uselessly cast away.

This is called the hidden wisdom.

Therefore the good man is the teacher of the bad,

And the bad man is the material from which the good man learns.

He who does not honour his teacher and who does not greatly care for the material is greatly confused though he thinks himself wise.

Such is called yao-miao (subtle).

One good at traveling leaves no tracks or prints.

One good at words says nothing flawed or blameworthy.

One good at reckoning does not use bamboo tallies.

One good at locking up has no lock yet what is locked cannot be opened.

One good at tying up has no cord yet what is tied cannot be untied.

This is how the sage is always good at saving people, so no one is discarded,

Always good at saving things, and so nothing is discarded.

This is what is known as maintaining the light.

Thus the good man is the teacher of men who are not good.

Men who are not good are material for the good man.

But if they do not value their teacher, and he does not cherish his material, no matter how wise, one will become greatly lost.

This is called the "profoundly subtle."

1. The good traveler leaves no track behind;

2. The good speaker [speaks] without blemish or flaw;

3. The good counter doesn't use tallies or chips;

4. The good closer of doors does so without bolt or lock, and yet the door cannot
be opened;

5. The good tier of knots ties without rope or cord, yet his knots can't be
undone.

6.
Therefore the Sage is constantly good at saving men and never rejects anyone;

7. And with things, he never rejects useful goods.

8. This is called Doubly Bright.

9.
Therefore the good man is the teacher of the good,

10. And the bad man is the raw material for the good.

11. To not value one's teacher and not cherish the raw goods—

12. Though one had great knowledge, he would still be greatly confused.

13. This is called the Essential of the Sublime.

With enough
practice,

you could walk without leaving any footprints.

Speak without stumbling over your words.

Do complicated math problems in your head.

You could build a door with no lock

that nobody could open.

You could tie something down with no knots,

without even a rope,

and nobody could get it loose.

Masters have
time to help everybody,

and ignores nobody.

They uses their resources wisely,

wasting nothing.

Some people call this "following the light."

Good people
teach others

who have the potential to be good.

Brains count for nothing

if you fail to respect your teachers

or to honor the potential in others.

That's one of the most important lessons of Tao.

.

Using the Light

A good traveler leaves no trace.

A good speaker makes no slips.

A good accountant uses no devices.

A good door needs no bolts to remain shut.

A good fastener needs no rope to hold its bond.

Therefore the wise are good at helping people,

and consequently no one is rejected.

They are good at saving things,

and consequently nothing is wasted.

This is called using the Light.

Therefore the good teach the bad,

and the bad are lessons for the good.

Those who neither value the teacher nor care for the lesson

are greatly deluded, though they may be learned.

Such is the essential mystery.

A good traveler needs no noseband, does not trespass

A good speaker makes no promise, causes no opposition

A good reckoner uses no counter and calculation

A good watchman locks without bolt and key yet no one can break in.

Likewise the Sage:

His will to help embraces all never wavers and locks no one out.

His serenity tolerates all never rests, despises and abandons no one.

Enlightened from within he leads all to the Light.

The wise man is the unwise man's teacher and the unwise is the material upon which wise man works.

One who does not value his teacher one who does not love his material misunderstands and misses the way of Tao the way to the mystery of enlightenment.

Procuring Enlightenment

Lao Tze says,

The skillful traveller leaves no wheel track;

the skillful speaker makes no slip of the tongue;

the skillful reckoner uses no tallies;

the skillful closer needs no bolts, while it is impossible to open what he has shut;

the skillful binder uses no strings or knots, while it is impossible to loosen what he has bound.

In the same way the sage is always skillful at saving men, and there is no rejected person;

he is always skillful at saving things, and there is no rejected thing.

This is called 'procuring enlightenment.'

Therefore the man of skill is a master of he who has no skill;

and he who has no skill is the servant of he who has skill.

If one does not value his master, and the other does not love his servant, intelligent as they are, they might be perplexed.

FOLLOWING THE TAO

The
sage follows the natural way,

doing what is required of him.

Like
an experienced tracker,

he leaves no tracks;

like a good speaker, his speech is fluent;

He makes no error, so needs no tally;

like a good door, which needs no lock,

he is open when it is required of him,

and closed at other times;

like a good binding, he is secure,

without the need of borders.

Knowing
that virtue may grow from example,

this is the way in which the sage teaches,

abandoning no one who stops to listen.

Thus, from experience of the sage,

all might learn, and so might gain.

There
is mutual respect twixt teacher and pupil,

for, without respect, there would be confusion.

A good traveler has no fixed plans

and is not intent upon arriving.

A good artist lets his intuition

lead him wherever it wants.

A good scientist has freed himself of concepts

and keeps his mind open to what is.

Thus the Master is available to all people

and doesn't reject anyone.

He is ready to use all situations

and doesn't waste anything.

This is called embodying the light.

What is a good man but a bad man's teacher?

What is a bad man but a good man's job?

If you don't understand this, you will get lost,

however intelligent you are.

It is the great secret.

The perfect traveler does not need a trail.

The perfect speaker does not leave any argument.

The perfect planner does not need a sketch.

The perfect door does not need a latch.

The perfect binder does not need string.

Hence Sage rulers always perfectly saved people, thus nobody was abandoned;

and always perfectly saved things, thus nothing was wasted.

This is called "blocking enlightenment".

The good person is the teacher of the bad person.

A bad person is a lesson for the good person.

Esteem the teacher and be aware of the lesson.

Otherwise even though one is intelligent, he will be misguided.

These are the marvelous functions of Dao.

A good traveler leaves no tracks.

A good speaker is without flaw.

A good planner does not calculate.

A good doorkeeper does not lock, yet it cannot be opened.

A good knotter does not use binding, yet it cannot be undone.

Therefore, the sage is good at his earnest demands upon people.

So no one is left out.

No talent is wasted.

This is called being in the tow of enlightenment,

And it ensures the good person.

For everything that is good is the teacher of the good person.

Everything that is bad becomes a resource for the good person.

No need to honor the teachers.

No need to love the resources.

Though knowing this is a great paradox,

It is the subtle principle.

XXVII

Skilled
travelers always find the easy path

Skilled speakers talk freely, on any subject

Skilled counters never need to use paper and pencil

A door can be sealed with neither bolt nor lock

A knot tied without rope or cord, if you only know the skill

The
taoist's skill is saving men,

He does this regardless of their aptitude for being saved

He never discards a useful thing simply because it needs a little work

And since every man thinks of himself as useful

The taoist needs only one attitude for all men

A
skilled leader can create goodness in whoever comes to hand

And anyone, bad or good, can be his raw material

But fail to respect the material as much as the act

And nothing will be created, no matter how much effort goes into it

The
point:

There is nothing more practical than faith

Good Works

Good works are trackless,

good words are flawless,

good planning isn't calculating.

What is well closed has no bolt locking it,

but cannot be opened.

What is well bound has no rope confining it,

but cannot be untied.

Therefore sages always consider it good to save people,

so that there are no wasted humans;

they always consider it good to save beings,

so that there are no wasted beings.

So good people are teachers

of people who are not good.

People who are not good

are students of people who are good.

Those who do not honor teachers or care for students

are greatly deluded, even if knowledgeable.

This is called an essential subtlety.

An able driver leaves no ruts and tracks.

An eloquent speaking is flawlessly fluent.

A smart counter uses no tools.

A superb lock cannot be opened, yet it has not bolts.

A good tie cannot get loose, yet there is no rope used.

The sage constantly saves people, so nobody is abandoned;

And constantly saves things, so nothing is wasted.

This is intelligent.

Thus, able people can be the teachers of incompetent people.

The failure of incompetent people can serve as lessons for the able people.

Ignoring the teachers and neglecting the lessons make even the smart people blunder.

This is an extremely important point.

Good walking leaves no track behind it.

Good speech leaves no mark to be picked at.

Good calculation makes no use of counting-slips.

Good shutting makes no use of bolt and bar, and yet nobody can undo it.

Good tying makes no use of cord, and yet nobody can untie it.

Hence, the sage is always good at saving men, and therefore nobody is forgotten; always good at saving things, and therefore nothing is wasted.

This is called illumination.

Hence, good men are teachers of bad men.

Bad men are the property of good men.

Not to revere one's teacher, not to cherish one's property, is to be on the wrong road, however intelligent one may be.

This is called the essential and the mysterious.

A good traveler leaves no tracks.

A good speaker makes no slips.

A good reckoner needs no tally.

A good door (tightly fit) needs no lock, yet no one can open it.

Good tie requires no knots, yet no one can loosen it.

Thus, the sages value all men, no one abandoned,

value all things, nothing abandoned.

This is called "following the wisdom light."

Thus, who value a man value the man, not what he knows.

Who does not value the man, value his talent.

If not respect what he knows, not love his talent,

even a genius will be wasted (confused).

This is the crux of mystery (of developing people's talent).

A skillful traveler leaves no track.

A skillful speaker makes no slip.

A skillful reckoner needs no counting rod.

A skillfully made door requires no bolts,

yet it cannot be opened.

A skillful binding has no cords or knots,

yet it cannot be untied.

Therefore,
the True Person is skillful in assisting people,

and abandons nobody;

In skillful in assisting things,

and abandons nothing.

This is called "Following the lnner Light."

Therefore,
the skillful person is the teacher

of the person without skill.

The person withont skill is the material

for the skillfirl person.

If you do not respect the teacher,

if you do not care for the material,

you are on the road to confusion

and your cleverness will not save you.

This
is an essential principle.

The
best walkers leave no trail

the best speakers neither slip nor offend

the best accountants need no calculator

the safest places have no bolts or locks,

the best friendships have no need of vows or promises,

yet they cannot be broken

the best theology has no god or heaven

yet everyone is saved.

Thus the wise person

helps people, never becoming callous;

helps all living things, never becoming superior.

No one refused, no thing abandoned,

following an inner self-knowledge.

Although
the educated are the teachers of the ignorant,

ignorance remains the foundation of knowledge and education.

When teachers lose respect

and students are not cared for,

ignorance prevails.

This is no secret.

A good traveller leaves no track or trace behind, nor does fit activity. So
a good runner leaves no track.

Perfect speech is like a jade-worker whose tool leaves no mark. Good speech
leaves no flaws.

The perfect reckoner needs no counting-slips; the good reckoner uses no counters.

The perfect, shut door is without bolt nor bar and can't be opened.

The perfect knot needs neither rope nor twine, yet can't be untied. No one can
untie it.

So the wise man is good at helping men, always good in saving men: the wise
man is all the time helping men in the most perfect way - he certainly doesn't
turn his back on men; is all the time in the most perfect way helping creatures.
He certainly doesn't turn his back on creatures, and consequently no man is
rejected. For that reason there's no useless person.

And he is always good in saving. So nothing is rejected.

This is called following the light (of nature) - is called resorting to the
light, nay, stealing some divine light.

Truly, the good man is the teacher of the bad, as they say. But the bad man
is the lesson of the good, in part some material from which the good can learn.
And so the imperfect is the equipment of the perfect man".

He who hardly respects or values his teacher, hardly cares for the material
or loves his lesson, is gone far astray even if well versed.

That's the fine secret.

He who is skilled at traveling leaves neither tracks nor traces;

He who is skilled at speaking is flawless in his delivery;

He who is skilled in computation uses neither tallies nor counters;

He who is skilled at closing things tightly has neither lock nor key, but what he closes cannot be opened;

He who is good at binding has neither cord nor string, but what he binds cannot be untied.

For these reasons,

The sage is always skilled at saving others and does not abandon them,

nor does he abandon resources.

This is called "inner intelligence."

Therefore,

Good men are teachers for the good man,

Bad men are foils for the good man.

He who values not his teacher

and loves not his foil,

Though he be knowledgeable,

is greatly deluded.

This is called "the wondrous essential."

A good walker makes no dust after him.

The good speaker incurs no discussion.

The good reckoner needs no arithmetic.

The good keeper needs no bolts or bars, and none can open after him.

The wise man is constant and a good helper of his fellows. He rejects none.

He is a continual good preserver of things. He disdains nothing.

His intelligence is all-embracing.

Good men instruct one another; and bad men are the material they delve in.

Whoever, therefore, does not honour his teacher and cherish his material, though he be called wise, is yet in a state of delusion.

This is no less important than strange.

When You Hear the Urgings of Your Heart

The path of love

is illumined by intuition.

Intuition connects the mind

to the heart,

and creates openness and flexibility.

Do not hold on to preferences

that things or people

be one way or another.

This will muffle intuition's voice.

Instead be ready to change course

at a moment's notice

when you hear the urgings of your heart.

Sadly, we all learn the power of our intuition

by experiencing the consequences

of ignoring it.

I ignored mine for many years

and paid a heavy price.

But, when it truly counted,

I followed it to my own heart's mate.

A good traveller leaves no track or trace. A good speech leaves no flaws. A good reckoner uses no counters.

A well-shut door needs no bolts, and yet it cannot be opened. A well-tied knot needs no rope and yet none can untie it.

Therefore the sage is always good in saving men and consequently no
man is rejected. He is always good in saving things and consequently
nothing is rejected. This is called following the light (of Nature).

Therefore the good man is the teacher of the bad, And the bad is the material from which the good may learn.

He who does not value the teacher, Or greatly care for the material,
Is greatly deluded although he may be learned. Such is the essential
mystery.

One may move
so well that a foot-print never shows,

Speak so well that the tongue never slips,

Reckon so well that no counter is needed,

Seal an entrance so tight, though using no lock,

That it cannot be opened,

Bind a hold so firm, though using no cord,

That it cannot be untied.

And these are traits not only of a sound man

But of many a man thought to be unsound.

A sound man is good at salvage,

At seeing that nothing is lost.

Having what is called insight,

A good man, before he can help a bad man,

Finds in himself the matter with the bad man.

And whichever teacher

Discounts the lesson

Is as far off the road as the other,

Whatever else he may know.

That is the heart of it.

Skillful driving leaves no tracks.

Skillful talking contains no blunders.

Skillful calculating needs no instruments.

Skillful securing requires no lock, but cannot be opened.

Skillful tying uses no knots, but cannot be untied.

Therefore, the great men were always good at making all people useful, so no one was left out;

They were very good at making all other things useful, so nothing was wasted.

This is why they were considered to be genuinely wise.

So, the kind are the teachers of the unkind;

The unkind are the resources of the kind.

If a person does not value the teachers or the resources,

No matter how smart he is, he is completely lost.

Therefore, this is an extremely important wisdom.

The master in his action is so complete

that he leaves no trace behind.

The master in his conversation is so balanced

that he leaves no discord behind.

The master in his thinking is so original

that he depends on no external authority.

The master in protecting people is so skillful

that, without any visible means, he renders all attempts for invasion ineffectual.

The master in uniting people is so adept

that, without any visible means, he renders all efforts for disunity ineffectual.

Thus, the master, without abandoning anyone, is always good at empowering people

And, without abandoning anything, is always good at utilizing things.

This is the all-embracing wisdom of the Tao.

Hence, the virtuous is the teacher of the non-virtuous,

While the non-virtuous serves as the lessons for the virtuous.

If you value not your teacher or cherish not your lessons,

No matter how intelligent and informed you are, you are greatly deluded.

This is the essential, subtle truth of the Tao.

A good walker leaves no trace.

A good speaker uses no blasphemy.

A good calculator uses no counting aids.

A good door-keeper needs no bars.

A good knot uses no strings.

Similarly,

A wise saver will part with no one.

A wise user will waste nothing.

It is the subtle insight that gives such abilities.

The wise person will be seen as the teacher for the unwise.

The unwise will be regarded as the resources for the wise.

One may be a mental genius,

But if he appreciates no teacher or other resources,

He is only a blundering fool.

The key is such teaching/learning.

The sage follows the natural way.

Like an experienced tracker...he himself leaves no tracks.

Like a good speaker...his language lacks flaws and rebuke.

Like an experienced counter he needs no calculator.

He is like a well-made door, which needs no lock.

He is the perfect knot, leaving no end to be unraveled.

He attends to every detail.

It is in this way that the sage is skilful at saving men,

and so he does not cast away any man.

He is always skilful at saving things, and so he does not cast away anything.

This is called embodying the light.

It is in this way that the skillful master is the teacher of the one without skill.

And the one without skill is the charge and responsibility of the master.

From the teachings of the master, all might learn who wish to listen.

Not respecting the teacher, nor valuing the student, you will see confusion, no matter how intelligent you are.

This is called the Essential Subtlety.

