===== Chapter 33 =====

Those who understand people are wise.

Those who understand themselves are luminous.

Those who triumph over people have forcefulness.

Those who triumph over themselves have strength.

Those who know sufficiency are rich.

Those who work vigorously have determination.

That which does not lose its place lasts long.

That which dies but does not perish lives long.

Knowing others is intelligent. Knowing yourself is enlightened.

Conquering others takes force. Conquering yourself is true strength.

Knowing what is enough is wealth. Forging ahead shows inner resolve.

Hold your ground and you will last long. Die without perishing and your life will endure.

Those who know others are clever.

Those who know themselves are enlightened.

Those who conquer others have strength.

Those who conquer themselves are powerful.

Those who are contented have wealth.

Those who move ahead have purpose.

Those who don't run away from their posts endure.

Those who die but don't perish live on.

KNOWING ONESELF

To know and understand others, Is to have wisdom.

To know and understand oneself, Is to have wisdom and enlightenment.

To conquer others, Is to have physical force.

To conquer oneself, Is to have physical force as well as internal strength.

To be content with what one has, Is to be rich indeed.

To act with perseverance, Is to be strong willed.

To preserve one's natural essence, Is to endure.

To die, Is not to perish.

One's eternal presence is true longevity.

Recognize that people naturally know.

Knowing the light sustains humanity.

This naturally emerging force overcomes violence.

Knowing the light provides strength in action.

Resolve to not separate from it.

The light is enduring.

Death is not the end.

The light is immortal.

THE DISCRIMINATION (VIVEKA) OF THE

He who understandeth others understandeth Two; but he who understandeth

himself understandeth One. He who conquereth others is strong; but he

who conquereth himself is stronger yet. Contentment is riches; and continuous

action is Will.

He
that adapteth himself perfectly to his environment, continueth for

long; he who dieth without dying, liveth for ever.

He who knows other men is discerning; he who knows himself is intelligent.He who overcomes others is strong; he who overcomes himself is mighty.He who is satisfied with his lot is rich; he who goes on acting with energyhas a (firm) will.

He who does not fail in the requirements of his position, continueslong; he who dies and yet does not perish, has longevity.

One who sees trough the other is clever

One knowing oneself is wise

One who conquers the other is powerful

One conquering oneself is inviolable

One who is satisfied is rich

One that wants a lot is busy all the time

One who stays oneself, is a four-square fellow

One who dies before dying, lives in the present forever

He who knows much about others may be learned, but he who understands himself is more intelligent.

He who controls others may be powerful, but he who has mastered himself is mightier still.

He who receives his happiness from others may be rich, but he who whose contentment is self-willed has inexhaustible wealth.

He who occupies a place provided for him by others may live a long life, but he who dwells in his own self-contained place, even though he decays, is eternal.

To understand others is to have knowledge;

To understand oneself is to be illumined.

To conquer others needs strength;

To conquer oneself is harder still.

To be content with what one has is to be rich.

He that works through violence may get his way;

But only what stays in its place

Can endure.

When one dies one is not lost, there is no other longevity.

One who knows others is wise.

One who knows self is enlightened.

One who masters others is strong.

One who masters self is powerful.

Knowing you have enough is fulfillment.

Exerting strong effort brings exhaustion.

He who abides where he is lasts long.

He who dies without ceasing is timelessly present.

To know others means intelligence

To know oneself means clarity

To overcome others is to have strength

To overcome oneself is to be powerful

To know satisfaction means wealth

(To be) energetic in movement means to have purpose

To not forget one's own place means enduring

To die and yet not perish means longevity

Virtue

To understand others is to have wisdom;

To understand yourself is to be wise.

To conquer others is to have strength;

To conquer yourself is to be strong.

To know when you have enough is to be rich.

To go forward with strength is a sign of ambition.

To lose not your place is to last long.

To die but not to be forgotten -

That is true long life.

Knowing others is intelligence; knowing the self is enlightenment.

Conquering others is power; conquering the self is strength.

Know what is enough, and you'll be rich. Persevere, and you'll develop a will.

Remain in the center, and you'll always be at home. Die without dying, and you'll endure forever.

Study mankind, for this is wisdom.

But first examine yourself, for this is penetration.

To subjugate others, it takes power.

But defeating your own ego

Needs the gentle strength of perseverance.

Acknowledge the wealth within you,

And you won't need to strive for more.

But grasp after the brass ring,

And you become a conformist

In a society of willful pursuit.

The one who can remain in the center

Will endure beyond the reach of time.

For though he may die to the visible,

His life continues in immanence.

Thus, he is immortal.

One who knows others is wise;

one who knows himself is wisest.

One who conquers others is strong;

one who conquers himself is strongest.

To
be content is to be wealthy.

To be dedicated is to be strong.

To be genuine is to endure.

To die and be remembered is to have immortality.

Who knows men has discernment; who knows himself has illumination.

Who overcomes men has strength; who overcomes himself has determination. Who knows contentment has wealth.

Who acts vigourously has will.

Who never departs from his base, endures long; he dies, but does not perish; he lives eternally.

He who knows others is wise; He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others is strong; He who conquers himself is mighty.

He who knows contentment is rich. He who keeps on his course with energy has will.

He who does not deviate from his proper place will long endure. He who may die but not perish has longevity.

Achievable goals.

Those who know the human are wise.

The self-knowing are discerning.

Those who triumph among the human have power.

The self-triumphing are coercive.

Those who know sufficiency are affluent.

Those who coercively act have will.

Those who don't lose their 'that-which' are long-lasting

Those who die and don't disappear are long-lived.

To know others is to be intelligent.

To be aware of one's self is to be awakened.

To overcome others is to have superior strength.

To overcome one's self is to be vigorous.

To be satisfied is to be wealthy.

To act with power is to be aspiring.

To retain one's source is to be long-lasting.

To die yet not to be deceased is to have longevity.

He who knows others is resourceful; he who knows himself is enlightened.

He who surpasses others has power; he who surpasses himself is strong.

He who is content is rich.

He who keeps going has will.

He who maintains his own position will last long.

He who dies, yet whose natural character remains, will live a long life.

He who knows others is crafty;

He who knows himself is clear-sighted.

He who overcomes others has strength;

He who overcomes himself has stamina.

He who knows content is rich;

He who practices strenuously achieves his aspiration;

He who does not lose his base is long-enduring;

He who dies without forgetting is long-lived.

The person who knows others is wise,

The person who knows himself is enlightened.

The person who conquers others is strong,

The person who conquers himself is powerful.

The person who knows his lot is rich.

The person who maintains his path with energy has a strong will.

The person who does not stray from his proper place will have a long life.

The person who dies but does not perish will exist forever.

Feo-tzu says:

"The difficulty in knowing is not learning others, but learning ourselves.

Therefore, the person who learns himself is enlightened."

He who knows others is clever;

He who knows himself has discernment.

He who overcomes others has force;

He who overcomes himself is strong.

He
who knows contentment is rich;

He who perseveres is a man of purpose;

He who does not lose his station will endure;

He who lives out his days has had a long life.

The Virtue of Discrimination

One who knows others is clever, but one who knows himself is enlightened.

One who conquers others is powerful, but one who conquers himself is mighty.

One who knows contentment is rich and one who pushes with vigor has will.

One who loses not his place endures.

One who may die but will not perish, has life everlasting.

With intellect, you have knowledge of others. Enlightened there is no self. With force you can master others. By yielding you master the Tao. In striving to accumulate wealth, you become poor. In accepting what you have, you become rich. Do only what needs to be done and relax. If you accept death, you will live in eternity.

Knowing others is wisdom;

knowing self is discernment.

Winning over others shows prowess;

winning over self shows strength.

With contentment, one is wealthy.

With persistence, one shows determination.

Holding on without losing ground, one is strong;

Dying without giving up Direction, one lives long.

To know people is wisdom,

but to know yourself is enlightenment.

To master people takes force,

but to master yourself takes strength.

To know contentment is wealth, and to live with strength resolve.

To never leave whatever you are is to abide,

and to die without getting lost - that is to live on and on.

He who understands others is intelligent;

He who knows himself is wise.

He who wins over others is persuasive;

He who conquers himself is strong.

He who feels contented is rich;

He who acts forcefully is determined.

He who does not lose his center endures;

He who dies but is not forgotten enjoys long life.

Those
who know men are wise

Those with self-knowledge are luminous

Those who conquer others possess strength

Those who conquer themselves possess force

Those with knowledge of enough are wealthy

Those who strive to go possess aspiration

Those who are not losing their place are long-lasting

Those who die yet without perishing are long-lived.

Knowing others is wisdom, but knowing oneself is superior wisdom, (one's own nature being most hidden and profound).

Imposing one's will on others is strength; but imposing it on oneself is superior strength (one's own passions being the most difficult to subdue).

Being satisfied (content with what destiny has given), is true wealth; being master of oneself (bending oneself to the dispositions of destiny) is true character.

Staying in one's (natural) place (that which destiny has given), makes for a long lifer. After death, not ceasing to be, is true longevity, (which is the lot of those who have lived in conformity with nature and destiny).

Those who understand others are intelligent

Those who understand themselves are enlightened

Those who overcome others have strength

Those who overcome themselves are powerful

Those who know contentment are wealthy

Those who proceed vigorously have willpower

Those who do not lose their base endure

Those who die but do not perish have longevity

The one who understands other people is merely knowledgeable or intelligent; the one who understands oneself is truly wise and enlightened. Wisdom is above intelligence, just as knowledge is above ignorance.

The one who overcomes other people has external strength; the one who can overcome oneself possesses authentic inner power. External strength never lasts. True strength resides within and lasts forever.

The few who know the meaning of contentment and feel satisfied with what they have are truly wealthy. Wealth is not measured by dollar amounts. One can possess millions and still be tormented by feelings of inadequacy.

Tao cultivators go forth in life with vigor and energy. They understand that vitality is the fuel for excellence and achievements, so they never overlook the importance of the body. By practicing physical disciplines with willpower and determination, they develop their vigor and energy in a natural and healthy way.

The one who does not lose sight of spiritual basis can really withstand the test of time. As we progress in the path of cultivation, it is a certainty that we will be tested. Those who lack a strong foundation will not be able to handle the challenge.

The one who passes away, but does not fade from memory, is the one who possesses true longevity. A noble goal for Tao cultivators is to live a life that is rich with meaning and full of the joy of helping others. Such a life lives on forever in the hearts of people, fondly remembered and sorely missed.

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF DISCRIMINATION

He who knows others is intelligent; he who understands himself is enlightened; he who is able to conquer others has force, but he who is able to control himself is mighty. He who appreciates contentment is wealthy.

He who dares to act has nerve; if he can maintain his position he will endure, but he, who dying does not perish, is immortal.

One who knows (chih) others is knowledgeable (chih);

One who knows (chih) the self is enlightened (ming).

One who overcomes others has physical might;

One who overcomes the self (tzu sheng) is strong (ch'iang).

One who knows contentment (chih tsu) is rich;

One who acts strongly (ch'iang) has will power (chih).

One who does not lose where one belongs lasts long;

One who dies without perishing (wang) has longevity.

One who knows others is wise; one who knows himself is wisest. One who conquers others is strong; one who conquers himself is strongest.

To be content is to be wealthy; to be dedicated is to be strong; to be genuine is to endure; to die and be remembered is to have immortality.

Knowing others is a kind of knowledge;

knowing yourself is wisdom.

Conquering others requires strength;

conquering yourself is true power [Te].

To realize that you have enough is true wealth.

Pushing ahead may succeed,

but staying put brings endurance.

Die without perishing, and find the eternal.

Thirty-three

Knowing others is wisdom;

Knowing the self is enlightenment.

Mastering others requires force;

Mastering the self needs strength.

He who knows he has enough is rich.

Perseverance is a sign of willpower.

He who stays where he is endures.

To die but not to perish is to be eternally present.

He who knows others is wise;

He who knows himself is clever;

He who conquers others is forceful;

He who conquers himself is powerful;

He who knows contentment is rich;

He who perseveres is a man of will;

He who does not lose his root can endure;

He whose Tao survives him is long-lived.

He who knows others is wise;

He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who overcomes others has strength;

He who overcomes himself is strong.

He who knows to be content is rich.

He who persists in his action is strong-willed.

He who does not lose his place is long-lasting.

He who dies but does not perish is long-lived.

He who understands others is wise.

He who knows himself is sagacious.

To defeat others, you are powerful.

To prevail upon yourself, you are resolute.

To be contented is to be wealthy.

To diligently follow the way of Dao means you have great determination.

By not deviating from the path of Dao, you will perpetuate.

When a person dies but his spirituality persists, this is the essence of immortality.

Discriminating Virtue

Pien Teh

He who knows others is wise;

He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others is strong;

He who conquers himself is valiant.

He who knows contentment is rich;

He who acts with determination has high aims.

He who has not lost his proper abode endures;

He who dies and yet does not perish becomes immortal.

To know others is to be clever;

To know oneself is to be enlightened.

He who conquers others has strength,

But he who conquers himself has strength and courage indeed.

To know when one has enough is to be rich.

He who pursues a course with energy may attain his goal;

But to remain in one's proper place is to endure;

And he who dies yet does no cease to be

Achieves the blessing of true longevity.

Whoever knows others has wisdom;

Whoever knows himself has insight.

Whoever conquers others has force;

Whoever conquers himself has strength.

Whoever knows he has enough has wealth.

Whoever perseveres has purpose. Whoever keeps to one place endures.

Whoever dies without perishing lives long.

One who knows others is clever.

One who knows himself has insight.

One who overcomes others is forceful.

One who overcomes himself is truly strong.

One who knows he has enough is rich.

One who does not divert his mind from the realization of integral virtue is wisely willful.

One who preserves his natural integrity will endure.

One who embraces the subtle essence dies yet does not perish and thus enjoys true immortality.

XXXIII.

Discriminating
the Virtues

He
who knows others is wise,

But
he who knows himself is wiser still;

He
who conquers others is strong,

But
to conquer self needs greater strength and skill;

He
who is satisfied is rich,

He
who is firm in action has a will;

He
who loses not his place lives long,

But
the man who dies and does not perish, he lives longer stilt

He who knows men is wise,

He who knows himself can see clearly.

He who conquers men has strength,

He who conquers himself has power

He who knows that he has enough is rich,

He who acts with energy has a strong will.

He who fails not to find the Self shall endure,

He who dies, but does not perish, shall endure for ever.

Who
knows people is clever;

Who
knows self has enlightenment.

Who
conquers a people has force;

Who
conquers self is truly strong.

Who
knows when they have enough are rich,

And
who follows carefully

the
path of Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

is
a person of steady purpose.

Who
stays

where
they have found their true home

lasts
long,

And
who dies but is not forgotten enjoys real longevity.

He who knows others, is knowing; he who knows himself, is enlightened.

He who vanquishes others, has power; he who vanquishes himself, is strong.

He who acts forcefully, has determination; he who knows contentment, is rich.

He who departs not from his allotted place, will last; he who dies without perishing, will have long life.

He who knows other men is discerning; he who knows himself is

intelligent. He who overcomes others is strong; he who overcomes

himself is mighty. He who is satisfied with his lot is rich; he who

goes on acting with energy has a (firm) will.

He
who does not fail in the requirements of his position, continues

long; he who dies and yet does not perish, has longevity.

Understanding others is Knowledge.
Understanding oneself is Enlightenment.

Conquering others is Power.
Conquering oneself is Strength.

Contentment
is Wealth.
Forceful conduct is Reckless.
Not losing one's rightful nature
is Immortality.
To
'die' but not the perish
is to be eternally present.

It
may be said that you are wise

To see yourself as others do

But you are wiser still to see

From your own central point of view

Then
you see you have it all

The riches that are always here

Belong to you completely

Because your vision is so clear

HE who knows men is clever;

He who knows himself has insight.

He who conquers men has force;

He who conquers himself is truly strong.

He who knows when he has got enough is rich,

And he who adheres assiduously to the path of Tao is a man of steady purpose.

He who stays where he has found his true home endures long,

And he who dies but perishes not enjoys real longevity.

Understanding the world is knowledge,

Understanding yourself is enlightenment.

Mastering others is strength,

Mastering yourself is true power.

Having many things is affluence,

Being content with what you have is satisfaction.

Will power will increase perseverance,

But tranquility with the Tao brings eternal endurance.

Those who know others are intelligent;

those who know themselves are truly wise.

Those who master others are strong;

those who master themselves have true power.

Those
who know they have enough are truly wealthy.

Those
who persist will reach their goal.

Those
who keep their course have a strong will.

Those who embrace death will not perish,

but have life everlasting.

To know how other people behave takes intelligence, but to know myself takes wisdom.

To manage other people's lives takes strength, but to manage my own life takes true power.

If I am content with what I have, I can live simply and enjoy both prosperity and free time.

If my goals are clear, I can achieve them without fuss.

If I am at peace with myself, I will not spend my life force in conflicts.

If I have learned to let go, I do not need to fear dying.

One who knows others is intelligent.

One who knows himself is truly wise.

One who overcomes others has force.

One who overcomes the self has true strength.

One who knows he has enough is truly wealthy.

One who has discipline is sincere.

One who remembers his Source will endure.

He embraces death and so does not perish

but lives forever.

Knowing
others is impossible.

Knowing one's self requires only a remembering

of one's unity with all things.

Conquering
others requires force.

Conquering one's self requires letting go.

He
who understands his oneness with Infinity

resides in peace.

Living
one day at a time is the essence of harmony.

One who lives in harmony endures.

Passing
through death's door is immortality.

He who knows others is smart.

He who knows himself is wise.

He who triumphs over others has Power.

He who triumphs over himself has Strength.

He who has enough is Rich.

He who prevails has Will.

He who avoids Loss will survive.

He who dies knowing this, is blessed.

He who knows others is wise;

He who knows himself is enlightened.

Conquering others requires force;

Conquering oneself requires strength.

He who is content is rich.

To act with perseverance requires will-power.

He who stays where he is, endures.

To die but not be forgotten is to enjoy long life.

One who knows others is clever.

One who knows one's self is wise.

One who can defeat others has energy.

One who can defeat one's self is strong.

One who is easily satisfied is rich.

One who drives one's self forth has will.

One who never loses one's place lives long.

One who never vanishes after death is eternal.

One who understands others is clever one who understands himself has Clarity.

One who wins out over others has power one who wins out over himself is strong.

One who is content is wealthy one strong in his practice is self-possessed.

One who does not leave his place is lasting one who dies and does not perish is truly long lived.

He who knows people is reasonable. He who cognized himself is enlightened.* He who can conquer enemies is strong. He who conquered himself** is powerful.

He who has material wealth is rich. He who acts resolutely possesses willpower. He who indulges his desires is weak and fool.

He who attained the Mergence with Tao and does not lose it — he attained the Highest Beingness. After the death of the body, he continues to live in Tao as truly Immortal.

* I.e., he who cognized his own multidimensional organism.

** I.e., he who conquered his own vices, including their base — the lower self with its egocentrism.

Knowing the way people are, is wisdom,

But knowing himself, is indeed enlightenment.

Conquering an enemy is power,

Conquering himself is read power.

Contempt with what he has, the Wise Person is rich.

A persevering person will attain the goal.

The one who keeps steady has a good direction.

Even after death,

The power of the Wise Person has positive effects.

Thus he lives eternal.

Those
who know other people are knowledgeable.

Those who know themselves are enlightened.

Those
who overcome other people are forceful.

Those who overcome themselves are strong.

Those
who know when they have enough are rich.

Those who act strongly have aspirations.

Those
who do not lose their positions are long enduring.

Those who die and yet do not perish have life everlasting.

To know others is to be clever.

To know oneself is to have discernment.

To overcome others takes force.

To overcome oneself takes strength.

To be content is riches.

To act perseveringly takes will.

Not to lose one's place means one can last long.

To die without extinction means longevity.

Self-Mastery

Those who know others are intelligent;

Those who know themselves have insight.

Those who master others have force;

Those who master themselves have strength.

Those who know what is enough are wealthy.

Those who persevere have direction.

Those who maintain their position endure.

And those who die and yet do not perish, live on.

Knowledge from a book is intelligence. Sipping the tea is wisdom. You already have all you need.

It is wisdom to know others;

It is enlightenment to know one's self.

The
conqueror of men is powerful;

The master of himself is strong.

It
is wealth to be content;

It is willful to force one's way on others.

Endurance
is to keep one's place;

Long life it is to die and not perish.

He who knows others is wise,

He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others can be called physically strong,

He who conquers himself is mighty.

He who is content is rich,

He who acts with persistence has will,

He who does not lose his root will endure,

He who dies physically, but preserves Tao will enjoy a long life.

One who knows others is wise, but one who knows himself is perspicacious.

One who conquers others has strength, but one who conquers himself is powerful.

One who knows contentment is rich.

One who acts with power has his goal fulfilled.

One who does not lose his place lasts long.

One who dies but is not destroyed has longevity.

1. To understand others is to be knowledgeable;

2. To understand yourself is to be wise.

3. To conquer others is to have strength;

4. To conquer yourself is to be strong.

5. To know when you have enough is to be rich.

6. To go forward with strength is to have ambition.

7. To not lose your place is to last long.

8. To die but not be forgotten—that's [true] long life.

Knowing others
makes you smart,

but knowing yourself makes you wise.

To rule others, you must be powerful,

but to rule yourself, you must be strong.

If you have
only what you need,

you have true wealth.

If you never give up,

you will find a way.

If you stay true to yourself,

you will never be lost.

If you live your entire life,

you've really lived.

.

Inner Power

Those who know others are wise.

Those who know themselves are enlightened.

Those who overcome others require force.

Those who overcome themselves need strength.

Those who are content are wealthy.

Those who persevere have will power.

Those who do not lose their center endure.

Those who die but maintain their power live eternally.

He who knows others is clever;

He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others is strong;

He who conquers himself has might.

A man content with little, is rich.

A man who has a goal, knows his way.

A man who rests within himself, has permanence.

A man who has disbecome, has overcome death.

Knowing Oneself

Lao Tze says,

He who knows others is intelligent, while he who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others has the power of muscles, but he who conquers himself is strong.

He who knows contentment is rich, but he who is determined has strength of will.

He who does not leave the resource will endure, but he who knows to keep as still as a dead body but remain dynamic will enjoy longevity.

WITHOUT FORCE: WITHOUT PERISHING

Knowledge
frequently results

from knowing others,

but the man who is awakened,

has seen the uncarved block.

Others
might be mastered by force,

but to master one's self

requires the Tao.

He
who has many material things,

may be described as rich,

but he who knows he has enough,

and is at one with the Tao,

might have enough of material things,

and have self-being as well.

Will-power
may bring perseverance;

but to have tranquility is to endure,

being protected for all his days.

He
whose ideas remain in the world,

is present for all time.

Knowing others is intelligence;

knowing yourself is true wisdom.

Mastering others is strength;

mastering yourself is true power.

If you realize that you have enough,

you are truly rich.

If you stay in the center

and embrace death with your whole heart,

you will endure forever.

One who knows others is intelligent.

One who knows himself is enlightened.

One who overcomes others has power.

One who disciplines himself has will power.

One who knows satisfaction is rich.

One who overcomes himself is strong.

One who does not lose one's personality, endures.

One who is dead and never forgotten has longevity.

To know others is to be knowledgeable,

To know oneself is enlightenment;

To master others is to have strength,

To master oneself is to be powerful.

To know what is sufficient is to be rich.

To act with determination is to have will.

Not to lose one's substance is to endure.

To die, but not be forgotten is to be immortal.

XXXIII

Knowing
others is knowledge; knowing yourself is wisdom

Conquering others is strength; conquering yourself is power

Wanting more is ambition; stopping at enough is wealth

Having it all makes a full life; leaving and being honored, that is having lived

Those Who Know Otbers

Those who know others are wise;

those who know themselves are enlightened.

Those who overcome others are powerful;

those who overcome themselves are strong.

Those who are contented are rich;

those who act strongly have will.

Those who do not lose their place endure;

those who die without perishing live long.

Knowing others is smart.

Knowing oneself is clearheaded.

Winning others is forceful.

Winning oneself is powerful.

Content people are rich.

Diligent people are of high purpose.

Those, who stay their grounds, stand out.

Those, who die without being forgotten, are perpetual.

He who knows men is intelligent.

He who knows himself has insight.

He who conquers men is strong.

He who conquers himself is vigorous.

He who knows how to be enough is rich.

He who goes on assiduously is a man of steady will.

He who does not lose his dwelling endures long.

He who dies but perishes not has a long life.

Knowing others is wisdom.

Knowing self is enlightenment.

Managing others has power.

Managing self needs strength.

Who satisfies, rich.

Who persists, success.

Keep your place, endure.

Dead, yet present, immortal.

Knowing others is to be clever.

Knowing yourself is to be enlightened.

Overcoming others requires force.

Overcoming yourself requires strength.

To
know that you have enough is to be rich.

Push through and you may get your way,

but return home and you will endure.

Live out your days and you have had a long life.

Understanding
other people is wisdom,

understanding other religions is knowledge,

understanding oneself is enlightenment.

Strength is necessary to overcome others

power is necessary to overcome oneself.

Being
content with what one already has is wealth.

Violence may achieve a quick result

but nothing permanent.

Stay in place, content with what you have,

to live a long life.

Death is a return to the native elements.

He who knows others is learned;

but he who knows himself is wise, nay, in the end it could be illumined.

He who conquers others has strength of muscles;

To conquer oneself is hard. So he who conquers himself is strong.

To be content with what one has is to feel rich; so let the contented feel rich.

Next: He who works, may eventually succeed. And he one who acts with vigour
has will. Even he who works through sordid violence can get his way - The determined
one has strength of will.

What stays in its place can endure. He who doesn't lose his centre can last
quite long, he who hardly loses his place (with such as dao).

The one ho dies but doesn't really perish enjoys long life. He who dies yet
(his power) remains has long life. When such a one dies he should hardly be
thought of as [too] lost; there's no other longevity [than long life].

Understanding others is knowledge,

Understanding oneself is enlightenment;

Conquering others is power,

Conquering oneself is strength;

Contentment is wealth,

Forceful conduct is willfulness;

Not losing one's rightful place is to endure,

To die but not be forgotten is longevity.

He is wise who knows others.

He who knows himself is enlightened.

He is strong who conquers others.

He who conquers himself is mighty.

He is rich who is well satisfied.

He walks fast who has an object.

He who fills his place remains secure.

He who dies without being corrupted enjoys a good old age.

True Needs

Knowing each other well

is considered important.

But love begins with knowing yourself

and what you truly need.

When your beloved meets your needs

you may consider it a blessing.

But true blessing begins

when needs are simple and few.

Touching fingers and holding hands,

tasting wine and hearing music,

making love and sharing deeply,

then sleeping soundly through the night.

Let these become your true needs.

The first time my beloved and I held hands

we were walking across a grassy park.

We were shy and cautious

and the only intimacy we shared that day

was the intertwining of our fingers.

It was enough.

He who knows others is wise; He who knows himself is enlightened.

He who conquers others has physical strength. He who conquers himself is strong.

He who is contented is rich. He who acts with vigour has will.

He who does not lose his place (with Tao) will endure. He who dies but does not really perish enjoys long life.

Knowledge studies
others,

Wisdom is self-known;

Muscle masters brothers,

Self-mastery is bone;

Content need never borrow,

Ambition wanders blind:

Vitality cleaves to the marrow

Leaving death behind.

If you can understand others, you are wise;

If you can understand yourself, your mind is clear.

If you can overcome others, you are powerful;

If you can overcome yourself, you are strong.

If you can be satisfied, you are rich;

If you can be persistent, you are determined.

If you never lose your goals, you can last long;

If you die but you are not forgotten, then you live forever.

To know others is wisdom;

To know one's self is enlightenment.

To conquer others is power;

To conquer one's self is strength.

One who knows what is enough is wealthy;

One who does what is required is committed.

One who stays in one's destiny endures;

One who dies without perishing lives forever.

One who knows others is clever.

One who knows one's self is wise.

One who can defeat others has energy.

One who can defeat one's self is strong.

One who is easily satisfied is rich.

One who drives one's self forth has will.

One who never loses one's place lives long.

One who never vanishes after death is eternal.

Understanding the world is knowledge,

Understanding yourself is enlightenment.

Mastering others is strength,

Mastering yourself is true power.

Having many things is affluence,

Being content with what you have is satisfaction.

Will power will increase perseverance,

But tranquility with the Tao brings eternal endurance.

