===== Chapter 44 =====

Fame and the body: which is dear?

The body and money: which is more?

Gaining and losing: which is a fault?

This is indeed the reason that excessive love

Most certainly exacts a great price.

[After] much hoarding is certainly substantial loss.

Knowing sufficiency, no dishonor.

Knowing to stop, no danger.

[One is] able thereby to last eternally.

Name or body: which is closer? Body or possessions: which means more? Gain or loss: Which one hurts?

Extreme love exacts a great price. Many possessions entail a heavy loss.

Know what is enough - Abuse nothing. Know when to stop - Harm nothing. This is how to last for a long time.

Your name or your life: which do you hold dearer?

Your life or your wealth: which truly has value?

Victory or loss: which truly gives pain?

If you care to a fault you will certainly suffer.

If you pile up your wealth you're bound to take a loss.

If you are contented you meet with no disgrace.

If you are able to stop you are free from danger.

You can then last through all time.

ENDURING SAFELY

Does one's life and self character matter more than fame?

Is one's Life and self character treasured more than wealth?

Is loss of spiritual things more painful than gain of material things?

Hence:

Being attached to things while grudging expense,

One ultimately pays most dearly.

Hoarding most heavily,

One ultimately loses most heavily.

Being content,

One rarely suffers disappointment.

Knowing when to stop,

One is free from danger.

In this way, one is safe and can long endure.

Your body or your appearance, which do you love?

Your body or wealth, which is worth more?

Gain or loss, which is more difficult?

Excessive love surely creates great expense.

The more you hoard, the more you have to lose.

Know contentment, not disappointment.

Know how to stop before there is exhaustion.

You can thus last long.

MONITORIAL

What shall it profit a man if he gain fame or wealth, and lose his life?

If
a man cling to fame or wealth, he risketh what is worth more.

Be
content, not fearing disgrace. Act not, and risk not criticism. Thus

live thou long, without alarm.

Or fame of life, Which do you hold more dear? Or life or wealth, Towhich would you adhere? Keep life and lose those other things; Keep themand lose your life:-which brings Sorrow and pain more near? Thus we maysee, Who cleaves to fame Rejects what is more great; Who loves large storesGives up the richer state. Who is content Needs fear no shame. Who knowsto stop Incurs no blame. From danger free Long live shall he.

What comes first, life or status?

What's more important to you, yourself or your possessions?

What's worse, having or losing?

One who wants a lot pays a high price

One who has a lot, has a lot to lose

But one who is satisfied knows neither fear nor disgrace

And one who has stopped playing a part in the game will never be afraid again and will live happily ever after

Esteem by others or self-esteem, which is better? To value things or to value yourself, which is better? To have more or to have less, which is worse?

The more you have, the more you have to lose. The more you value things, the less you value your self. The more you depend on others for esteem, the less you are self-sufficient.

He who knows how to discriminate wisely avoids danger, And continues safely on his way.

Fame or one's own self, which matters to one most?

One's own self or things bought, which should count most?

In the getting or the losing, which is worse?

Hence he who grudges expense pays dearest in the end;

He who has hoarded most will suffer the heaviest loss.

Be content with what you have and are, and no one can despoil you;

Who stops in time nothing can harm.

He is forever safe and secure.

Name or person, which is more dear?

Person or possessions, which is more precious?

Gain or loss, which is more harmful?

Excessive desire incurs great expense.

One who hoards treasure suffers loss.

One who knows enough is enough

will always have enough.

One who knows when to stop avoids exhaustion.

Thus, he will endure.

Reputation compared to life, which is dearer?

Life compared to property, which is (worth) more?

Gain compared to loss, which is (more) distressing?

It is a given that extreme affection

Entails great cost

Much stored up entails heavy loss

To understand sufficiency is no disgrace

To understand restraint avoids limits -

(This is) the right way to live long

Contentment

Fame or your health: Which matters more?

Your health or your wealth: Which is more precious?

Gain or loss: In which is there harm?

If your desires are great, you're bound to be extravagant;

If you store much away, you're bound to lose a great deal.

Therefore, if you know contentment, you'll be nort disgraced.

If you know when to stop, you suffer no harm.

And in this way you can last a very long time.

Which is more precious, fame or health? Which is more valuable, health or wealth? Which is more harmful, winning or losing?

The more excessive your love, the greater your suffering. The longer you hoard, the heavier your losses.

Knowing what is enough is freedom. Knowing when to stop is safety. Practice these, and you'll endure.

A great name or self-knowledge:

To which of these does your heart respond?

Material goods or your natural virtues:

Which do you treasure more?

Profit or loss: which is more apt

To lead you toward destruction?

The love of excess lays Nature waste:

It spends the self and buys remorse.

Accumulation is the greatest loss.

Meet your needs and go no further,

And you will be a stranger to disgrace.

Recognize the limits of every situation,

And you'll be free from danger.

Thus can you fulfill the enduring harmony.

When an animal or a small child enters a new situation or environment, it will be observed to "test the waters," or to cautiously assess the things, beings, patterns of activity, and other conditions of the place and situation. This ability has, in fact, been studied across various scientific and naturalistic disciplines, with fascinating findings. It is the natural ability of organisms to "recognize the limits," as Lao Tzu expresses it, to read an environment with all the senses—both inner and outer—for potential danger, avenues of retreat, and whatever there is that lies beneath the surface appearance that may inform or protect. In such circumstances, animals will be seen to rely predominantly on their sense of smell—the outer scents that the environment presents, and the inner scents that they can detect with their entire being.

Thus, Chapter 44 is a poem about recognizing the limits as a preparation for action or adaptation. We humans can learn to avoid disgrace, remorse, and danger to our true selves by relying on our own sense of caution, our own ability to see, or sniff, the limits of every situation. Lao Tzu reminds us to ask, before we reach for profit, fame, knowledge, or wealth: what is this truly bringing me, and what might it cost me? Is it as much as I need, or is it more than my true self can afford? If the inner response to these questions feels like a warning, or if it even feels ambiguous, then it is time to ask for help from the invisible realm of being, of which your inner senses partake, and to let clarity develop within before you take action. In this way, we can learn to avoid many errors and still have abundance in our lives. In the next poem, Chapter 45, Lao Tzu addresses certain inner reference points that may help us in developing the clarity that avoids excess through recognizing limitation.

Fame or self: which is more important?

Wealth or self: which is more valuable?

Gain or loss: which is the greater evil?

Overdoing
leads to waste;

great fortunes invite theft.

Being
content prevents humiliation.

Knowing where to stop prevents danger.

To know this is to endure.

Fame or life, which is dearer? Life or wealth, which is more? Gain or loss, which is worse?

Excessive love implies excessive outlay. Immoderate accumulation implies heavy loss.

Who knows contentment meets no shame. Who knows when to stop incurs no danger. Such long endure.

Fame or your person, which is nearer to you?

Your person or wealth, which is dearer to you?

Gain or loss, which brings more evil to you?

Over-love of anything will lead to wasteful spending;

Amassed riches will be followd by heavy plundering.

Therefore, he who knows contentment can never be humiliated;

He who knows where to stop can never be perishable;

He will long endure.

Moderate Values

Your name or your self--which is closest to you?

Your self and commodities--which counts as more?

Obtaining and losing--which is a defect?

For this reason, superlative love certainly has great cost.

Much storage certainly increases losses.

Knowing to 'sufficient' does not disgrace.

Knowing to 'stop' does not endanger.'

You can endure longer.

Man's name or man's self - which is closer to him?

Man's self or his property - which is more valuable to him?

Success or failure - which is more harmful to him?

Things that are cherished more, cost more.

The more that is kept, the more that is missed.

The man who is easily contented is free from shame.

The man who knows the right time to stop is free from danger.

Thus, he will last long.

Fame or your self: which is dearer?

Your self or your possessions: which is more precious?

To have or to lose: which is more detrimental?

That is why the most beloved will cost a great deal.

The more one stores, the more one will lose.

He who is content will not meet disgrace.

He who knows when to stop will not face danger.

Only then is there longevity.

Fame and life - which is dearer?

Life and wealth - which is weightier?

Gain and loss - which is drearier?

Excessive love entails enormous costs;

Abundant stores entail heavy losses.

Therefore, knowing content

Will exempt you from humiliation;

Knowing where to stop

Will exempt you from peril.

You may long endure.

Tao begets one,

One begets two,

Two begets three,

Three begets all things.

All things, back to the shade, front to the light,

The harmony between them is the breath of life.

What others teach, I also teach:

"The cruel and violent do not die a natural death."

I will use that sentence as my guide.

Your name or your person,

Which is dearer?

Your person or your goods,

Which is worth more?

Gain or loss,

Which is a greater bane?

That is why excessive meanness

Is sure to lead to great expense;

Too much store

Is sure to end in immense loss.

Know contentment

And you will suffer no disgrace;

Know when to stop

And you will meet with no danger.

You can then endure.

Setting Up Precepts

"Name or person, which is more near?

Person or fortune, which is more dear?

Gain or loss, which is more sear?

"Extreme dotage leadeth to squandering.

Hoarded wealth inviteth plundering.

"Who is content incurs no humiliation,

Who knows when to stop risks no vitiation,

Forever lasteth his duration."

Is fame more important than living? Is money more important than happiness? What do you consider success or failure? Fame fulfils the lives of others. Happiness cannot be bought. Living is a celebration of the way things are. Happiness is wanting no more.

Fame and health - which is dearer?

Health and wealth - which is more valuable?

Gain and loss - which is more damaging?

Excessive love demands large outlay.

Overabundant wealth results in heavy loss.

Thus,

knowing contentment brings about no disgrace;

knowing moderation brings about no danger.

One lasts long.

Name or self: which is precious?

Self or wealth: which is treasure?

Gain or loss: which is affliction?

Indulge love and the cost is dear.

Keep treasures and the loss is lavish.

Knowing contentment you avoid tarnish, and knowing when to stop you avoid danger.

Try it and your life will last and last.

Fame or life, which is more precious?

Life or wealth, which is more important?

Gain or loss, which is more harmful?

An obsession for possession is doomed to be costly;

An excessive hoarding for profits is sure to incur heavy losses.

He who is contented loses no honour;

He who knows when to stop encounters no danger;

He can thus long endure.

Name
or body, which is more prized?

Body or wealth, which is more abundant?

Obtaining or losing, which is the greater fault?

So appropriately

Being very fond seeds great cost

What is abundantly stashed seeds heavy loss.

Know
enough, lack disgrace

Know to stop, lack danger

Growth and the long-lasting can happen.

Is not the body more important that reputation? Is life not of more consideration that wealth? Is it wise to risk a great loss for a small advantage?

He who is a great lover, wears out (his heart). He who amasses great wealth, heads toward ruin (by theft or confiscation).

Whereas he who is modest courts no disgrace; he who is moderate does not perish, but endures.

Fame or the self, which is dearer?

The self or wealth, which is greater?

Gain or loss, which is more painful?

Thus excessive love must lead to great spending

Excessive hoarding must lead to heavy loss

Knowing contentment avoids disgrace

Knowing when to stop avoids danger

Thus one can endure indefinitely

Which do you hold more dear, fame or your true self?

Which do you value more, your true self or material possessions?

Which is more painful, gain or loss?

Therefore we always pay a great price for excessive love

And suffer deep loss for great accumulation.

Knowing what is enough, you will not be humiliated.

Knowing where to stop, you will not be imperiled

And can be long-lasting.

Gain or loss, which is worse?

Excessive love implies excessive outlay. Immoderate accumulation implies heavy loss.

Who knows contentment meets no shame. Who knows when to stop incurs no danger. Such long endure.

PRECEPTS

Which is nearer, a name or a person? Which is more, personality or treasure? Is it more painful to gain or to suffer loss?

Extreme indulgence certainly greatly wastes. Much hoarding certainly invites severe loss.

A contented person is not despised. One who knows when to stop is not endangered; he will be able therefore to continue.

Your name and your body (shen), which is dearer?

Your body and material goods, which is more abundant?

Gain and loss, which is illness?

Therefore in excessive love one necessarily goes to great expenses,

In hoarding much one necessarily loses heavily.

Knowing contentment (chih tsu) one does not suffer disgrace,

Knowing when to stop one does not become exhausted (tai).

This way one may last long.

To have the world know of you or to know yourself, which is more important? Money or your mind, which is more valuable? Profit or loss, which is the greater evil? Overdoing leads to waste; great fortunes invite theft. Being content prevents harmful extremes. Knowing where to stop prevents danger. To know this is to endure.

Fame or self: which matters more?

Self or possessions: which is more valuable?

Loss or gain: which is worse?

Attachment to things brings suffering.

Much hoarded, much to be lost.

Know when enough is enough. Avoid disgrace.

Know when to stop. Avoid danger.

This is how to endure.

Forty-four

Fame or self: Which matters more?

Self or wealth: Which is more precious?

Gain or loss: Which is more painful?

He who is attached to things will suffer much.

He who saves will suffer heavy loss.

A contented man is never disappointed.

He who knows when to stop does not find himself in trouble.

He will stay forever safe.

Which is dearer, your name or your body?

Which is more important, your body or your goods?

Which is more harmful, gain or loss?

Excessive stinginess will result in great expense;

Too much amassment leads to great loss;

Knowing contentment avoids disgrace;

Knowing when to stop avoids danger.

Thus one can be long in safety.

Your name or your body, which is dearer?

Your body or your possessions, which is more valuable?

Gaining or losing, which worries you more?

Therefore, when your craving is excessive, your spending is extravagant.

When you store much, you are bound to lose much.

Know how to be content, and you will not be disgraced.

Know when to stop, and you will be free from danger.

Thus you will be long-lasting.

Personal glory or your life,

Which do you treasure more?

Your life or worldly possessions,

Which is more precious to you?

Gaining one but losing the other, which is more deleterious?

Therefore, wanting something badly can cost you dearly.

The more goods you hoard, the more you can possibly lose.

By being contented, you will never suffer any humiliation.

Knowing when to stop, you will never put your life in jeopardy.

Hence, you will have a long and wonderful life.

Self-Imposed Abstinences

Li Chieh

Which is more dear:

Fame or health?

Which is more valuable:

Health or wealth?

Which is more baneful:

Gain or loss?

Excessive love is bound to cause great expense.

Immense hoarding is bound to end in heavy loss.

He who knows contentment is free from disgrace;

He who knows when to quit will be free from peril.

He can endure a long time.

Your fame, or yourself - which is the nearer to you?

Your self, or your possessions - which is the more precious to you?

Acquiring, or losing - which is the worse to you?

He who sets his heart on things will spend wastefully;

He who hoards greatest treasure will risk greatest loss.

Therefore, to be content with enough is to risk no humiliation.

He who knows when to be still escapes harm.

He will endure.

Name and self,

Which is dearer?

Self and wealth,

Which is nearer?

Gain and loss,

Which brings more fear?

For:

Attachment comes at wasteful cost;

Hoarding leads to certain loss;

Knowing what is enough avoids disgrace;

Knowing when to stop secures from peril.

Only thus can you last long.

As for your fame and your life, which matters more?

As for your life and your wealth, which is more precious?

As for gain or loss, which is more damaging?

He who is most endeared to something must pay dearest for it.

He who has hoarded much will suffer great loss.

He who knows when enough is enough saves himself from humiliation.

He who knows when to stop protects himself from peril.

To know this is to be long enduring.

XLIV.

Established
Cautions

Which
is nearer you,

Your
name or yourself?

Which
is more to you,

Your
person or your pelf?

And
is your loss or gain

The
more malicious elf?

Extreme
love s price

Must
be paid with sacrifice.

Hoarding
to excess

Brings
ruin its its place,

Who
knows
he
has enough

Never
knows disgrace,

Who knows when to stop

Danger
will efface,

And
long can endure,

Evermore
secure.

Which is more dear to you, your character or your body?

Which do you treasure more, your body or your wealth?

Which makes you more unhappy, to gain or to lose?

But we must sacrifice much to gain true love.

We must suffer great loss to obtain much treasure,

To know contentment is to fear no shame.

To know how to stop is to avoid destruction.

Thus doing, we shall long endure.

Your name and

your body,

which is more valuable?

Your body and

your wealth,

which is more prized?

Gain and

loss,

which is more painful?

Too much

love for anything

will cost you

a lot in the end.

The storing up of

too much worldly goods

will mean

a big loss.

Know when

you have enough and

be immune

from disgrace.

Know when

to stop and

be protected

from dangers.

Only this way

can you

last long.

Name or person; - which is nearest?

Person or goods; - which counts most?

Gain or loss; - which is worse?

For, the greater sparing the greater spending; the more hoarding the more loss.

He who knows contentment, will not be ashamed.

He who knows where to abide will be without peril.

He will last long.

Or fame or life,

Which do you hold more dear?

Or life or wealth,

To which would you adhere?

Keep life and lose those other things;

Keep them and lose your life:--which brings

Sorrow and pain more near?

Thus
we may see,

Who cleaves to fame

Rejects what is more great;

Who loves large stores

Gives up the richer state.

Who
is content

Needs fear no shame.

Who knows to stop

Incurs no blame.

From danger free

Long live shall he.

Name or Person;
which is nearer?!
Person or Flesh;
which is
dearer?!
Gain or Loss;
which is drearier?..
Many
loves entail great costs;
Many riches ential heavy losses.
Know
contentment and you will not be disgraced.
Know satisfaction and you will
not be endangered;
then may you long endure.

Which
of these means more to you

Integrity or reputation?

Are gain and loss not equally

Responsible for limitation?

Everything
that you possess

Is surely transitory

Just be pleased with emptiness

And witness inner bliss and glory

You
know that your are always safe

If only you can be contented

With awareness as capacity

And with all that is presented

As for your name and your body, which is the dearer?

As for your body and your wealth, which is the more to be prized?

As for gain and loss, which is the more painful?

Thus, an excessive love for anything will cost you dear in the end.

The storing up of too much goods will entail a heavy loss.

To know when you have enough is to be immune from disgrace.

To know when to stop is to be preserved from perils.

Only thus can you endure long.

Fame or integrity, which do you hold most dear?

Your wealth or your life, to which will you cling?

Gain or loss, which one increases your anxiety?

In fame and wealth and gain can be found the seeds of failure,

And in integrity and life and loss can be found the root of treasures.

Thus it is that a contented person is never ashamed of what they have,

Having self-restraint he can avoid trouble,

In this way he can endure long, and live contentedly.

Which is more important, your honor or your life?

Which is more valuable, your possessions or your person?

Which is more destructive, success or failure?

Because
of this, great love extracts a great cost

and true wealth requires greater loss.

Knowing
when you have enough avoids dishonor,

and knowing when to stop will keep you from danger

and bring you a long, happy life.

Are you doing this work to facilitate growth or to become famous? Which is more important: acquiring more possessions or becoming more conscious? Which works better: getting or letting go?

There is a problem with owning a lot. There is a problem with getting more and more.

The more you have and the more you get, the more you have to look after. The more you might lose. Is that owning or being owned?

But if you give up things, you can give up spending your life looking after things.

Try being still in order to discover your inner security. If you have inner security, you will have what you want anyway. Also you will be less harried, and you will last longer.

Fame or self: which is more important?

Your possessions or your person: which is worth more to you?

Gain or loss: which is worse?

Therefore, to be obsessed with "things" is a great waste,

The more you gain, the greater your loss.

Being content with what you have been given, You can avoid disgrace.

Knowing when to stop, You will avoid danger.

That way you can live a long and happy life.

Your
name or your self: which is more important?

Your self or your possessions: which are more

valuable?

Gain or loss: which is more destructive to

peace and harmony?

He
who values his name separates from the

oneness of humanity and experiences

suffering.

Accumulating always creates confusion.

A man in harmony does not distinguish gain or loss.

A
man who refuses to judge or make distinctions

will never become lost or confused.

He will experience peace and harmony within

the oneness of Infinity.

Fame or Life, which is dearer ?

Life or Goods, which is better ?

Gain or Loss, which is more trouble ?

For strong desires carry a high cost.

Amassed Wealth leads to great loss.

Showing restraint is not shameful.

Knowing when to stop

avoids exhaustion and maintains endurance.

Fame or self: which is the most dear?

Self or wealth: which has most value?

Gain or loss: which is worse?

Attachment to things results in wasteful expense.

The more that is hoarded, the heavier the loss.

Know contentment and thus never be disappointed;

Know when to stop and thus avoid all danger.

This is the way to last forever.

Which is more precious, the body or the name?

Which is more important, the body or the goods?

Which is more harmful, gains or losses?

One who cares for reputation pays more.

One who possesses much fears death most.

Therefore,

One who is easily satisfied is not a disgrace.

One who knows where to stop is not stopped in life.

Your fame or your self, which is closer to you? Your self or your possessions, which counts for more? Gaining or losing, which brings the pain?

Indeed: Very fond, much expended much hoarding, heavy loss.

Be content and there will be no disgrace. Know to stop and there will be no danger. And you can last very long.

What is more necessary: life — or glory? What is more valuable: life — or wealth? What hurts more: gain — or loss?

If you accumulate much, you will lose much.

Show moderation and you will avoid failures. Show moderation and there will be no risk. Thus, you can live life in calm, without worries!

He who shows moderation does not suffer failure. He who knows when to stop avoids affliction. Thanks to this, he can manage to know Primordial and Eternal Tao.

Between glory and health, what is more important?

Between wealth and happiness what is more precious?

Running after gain is a big loss,

If happiness will be obtained with wealth

Many people would be happy, but they are not.

The
one happy with whatever he has, will avoid humiliation

He who knows to stop at the right time, will avoid danger,

Thus the Wise Person will last.

Which
is dearer to you, your [good] name or your life? Which [counts] more with you,
your person or your material goods? Which is the more injurious, gain or loss?
For these reasons, extreme love must involve great costs and great accumulations
must involve heavy losses. Knowing when you have enough [means] no ignominy,
and knowing when to stop [means] no danger, so one can long endure.

Of fame and life, which is more dear?

Of life and wealth, which is more worthy?

Of gain and loss, which is more distressing?

Therefore, loving in excess incurs great cost.

Overhoarding brings heavy loss.

To know what is enough means to avoid disgrace.

To know where to stop is to avoid danger.

Thus one can last long and endure.

The Power in Needing Less

Which is dearer,

Name or life?

Which means more,

Life or wealth?

Which is worse,

Gain or loss?

The stronger the attachments,

The greater the cost.

The more that is hoarded,

The deeper the loss.

Know what is enough;

Be without disgrace.

Know when to stop;

Be without danger.

In this way one lasts for a very long time.

Fortune or glory? Which is better? Answer and I will strike you. All you need is already within you. Leave things alone and you will be full.

Which is dearer, fame or self?

Which is worth more, man or pelf?

Which would hurt more, gain or loss?

The
mean man pays the highest price;

The hoarder takes the greatest loss;

A man content is never shamed,

And self-restrained, is not in danger:

He will live forever.

Which is more dear to me, credit or life?

Which is more valuable, life or wealth?

Which is more harmful, gain or loss?

Therefore the excessive stint must cause enormous expenses,

The rich hoard must suffer a serious loss.

Whoever is contented will meet no disgrace,

Whoever knows when and where to stop will meet no danger,

And he is able to endure long without worry.

Reputation or one's person, which is dear?

One's person or what he possesses, which is more?

Gain or loss, which is harm?

Thus it is that extreme meanness is sure to result in great expense, and much hoarding is sure to result in heavy loss.

One who knows contentment will not suffer damage to his reputation, and one who knows how to stop will not place himself in danger.

As such, he will last long.

1. Fame or your body—which is more dear?

2. Your body or possessions—which is worth more?

3. Gain or loss—in which is there harm?

4. If your desires are great, you're bound to be extravagant;

5. If your store much away, you're bound to lose a great deal.

6. Therefore, if you know contentment, you'll not be disgraced.

7. If you know when to stop, you'll suffer no harm.

8. And in this way you can last a very long time.

What's more
important,

fame or your well-being?

What's worth more,

your money or your life?

What is more dangerous,

winning or losing?

If you are too
attached

to your possessions,

they will bring you misery.

If you hang on to your riches,

you will suffer substantial loss.

If you know when you have enough,

you will never be disgraced.

If you practice moderation,

you can stay out of trouble.

And that's the
secret to lasting success.

.

How to Endure

Fame or your life, which do you love more?

Life or material wealth, which is more valuable?

Loss or gain, which is worse?

Therefore those who desire most spend most.

Those who hoard most lose most.

Those who are contented are not disappointed.

Those who know when to stop prevent danger.

Thus they can long endure.

Name or self what is closer to you?

Being or having what is more to you?

Acquiring or letting go what is better?

If desires and attachment grow Disaster also increases.

For a gain in having means a loss in being.

One who gives up the perishable escapes perishing.

One who stops finds inner support and with it fullness fulfillment and duration.

Gain And Loss

Lao Tze says,

Which means more to you, fame or self?

Which brings more to you, self or property?

Which ails you more, gain or loss?

The cost of the thing which you love is dear.

The treasure unscrupulously laid up shall result in heavy loss.

However, the contented man will not suffer disgrace.

A man who knows his limitations will not incur danger.

Namely, he can survive forever.

SUFFICIENCY

A
contented man knows himself to be

more precious even than fame,

and so, obscure, remains.

He
who is more attached to wealth

than to himself,

suffers more heavily from loss.

He
who knows when to stop, might lose,

but in safety stays.

Fame or integrity: which is more important?

Money or happiness: which is more valuable?

Success of failure: which is more destructive?

If you look to others for fulfillment,

you will never truly be fulfilled.

If your happiness depends on money,

you will never be happy with yourself.

Be content with what you have;

rejoice in the way things are.

When you realize there is nothing lacking,

the whole world belongs to you.

Between your fame and yourself, which is closer to you?

Between yourself and your wealth, which is more dear to you?

Between gain and loss, which is more of a burden to you?

Thus, excessive lust will cost one a great deal in the end.

Excessive wealth will make one suffer a heavy loss.

One who knows satisfaction will not be disgraced.

One who knows when to stop will not reach a perilous end.

Then he can rule everywhere and forever.

Which is more cherished, the name or the body?

Which is worth more, the body or possessions?

Which is more beneficial, to gain or to lose?

Extreme fondness is necessarily very costly.

The more you cling to, the more you lose.

So knowing what is sufficient averts disgrace.

Knowing when to stop averts danger.

This can lead to a longer life.

XLIV

Fame
or your health, riches or your health, which is worth more to you?

Can you gain one without losing the other?

Live the high life and you will lose respect, whatever you gain in envy

Be a miser and you will lose affection, whatever you gain in respect

If you want respect, know when you have enough

If you want peace of mind, know when to stop

Understand 'enough' and you'll live healthy and long

Name or Body

Which is closer, your name or your body?

Which is more, your body or your possessions?

Which is more destructive, gain or loss?

Extreme fondness means great expense,

and abundant possessions mean much loss.

If you know when you have enough,

you will not be disgraced.

If you know when to stop,

you will not be endangered.

It is possible thereby to live long.

Which is dearer, fame or health?

Which is more important, wealth or health?

Which is more damaging, obtaining the former or losing the latter?

Excessively loving results in great expense.

Excessive stocking leads to huge losses.

Therefore those who are not greedy can avoid disgrace.

Those who know where to stop can avoid failure.

They can have long-lasting success.

As for your name and your self, which is the dearer?

As for your self and your wealth, which is the more to be prized?

As for gain or loss, which is more painful?

Thus, extreme love leads to great cost.

Much storage leads to heavy loss.

To know when to have enough is to be immune from disgrace.

To know when to stop is to be preserved from danger.

Only thus can you last long.

Fame or self: Which matters more?

Self or wealth: Which is more precious?

Gain or loss: Which is more painful?

He who is attached to things will suffer much.

He who saves could suffer heavy loss.

A contented man is never disappointed.

He who knows when to stop does not find himself in trouble,

he will stay forever safe.

Your integrity or your body:

Which is more important?

Your body or your possessions

Which is worth more?

Gain or loss:

Which is more harmful?

Thus it is that the miser will pay much.

The hoarder will suffer great loss.

Be content with what you have

and you will not be disgraced.

Know when to stop

and you will be preserved from danger.

Only in this way will you long endure.

Being
praised by others

or valued by oneself

which is most important?

You or things,

health or wealth

which is more valuable?

Having
things

or losing things

which is better?

The
person who saves the most will pay the most in the end;

the one who acquires the most possessions and property

will lose the most in the end.

Attachment causes suffering.

Be
satisfied with where you are and what you have

and you will never be sorry.

Be satisfied with when you are

and you will be always

safe, always

secure.

Fame or one's own self, which matters most? Nay, which does one love more? Which
should one love more, fame or one's own life?

Which is more valuable, one's own life or wealth? One's own self or things bought,
the solid goods, which should really count most?

Which is worse, gain or loss? Could it be loss (of self) or possession which
is the greater evil? [Which gain is the greater evil here?]

Therefore: he who loves most spends most. He who has lavish desires could spend
extravagantly.

He who hoards much could lose much. Who hoards much is in for losing heavily
if who has hoarded most could suffer the heaviest loss.

The contented man could meet no disgrace;

Who stops in time knows when to stop. Who stops in time nothing can harm if
free from danger he can long endure and feel forever safe and secure. He can
long endure who stays forever safe and secure -

Name or person, which is nearer?

Person or property, which is dearer?

Gain or loss, which is drearier?

Many loves entail great costs,

Many riches entail heavy losses.

Know contentment and you shall not be disgraced,

Know satisfaction and you shall not be imperiled;

then you will long endure.

Which is neared to you, your name or your person?

Which is more precious, your person or your wealth?

Which is the greater evil, to gain or to lose?

Great devotion requires great sacrifice.

Great wealth implies great loss.

He who is content can never be ruined.

He who stands still will never meet danger.

These are the people who endure.

Conversation

Do not talk of fame and reputation,

either of yourselves or others.

Such conversations are illusions

and do not contribute to your joy and peace.

Your conversations help create your world.

Speak of delight, not dissatisfaction.

Speak of hope, not despair.

Let your words bind up wounds,

not cause them.

Conversation is one of the central arts of love.

It requires attention, effort and skill.

It demands open minds and compassionate hearts.

How many of your conversations

reflect discontentment with life as it is,

or with each other as you are?

Can you begin to turn them

to expressions of delight and hope,

of encouragement, learning and healing?

Which does one love more, fame or one's own life? Which is more
valuable, one's own life or wealth? Which is worse, gain or loss?

Therefore he who has lavish desires will spend extravagantly. He who hoards will lose most heavily.

He who is contented suffers no disgrace. He who knows when to stop is free from danger. Therefore he can long endure.

Which means
more to you,

You or your renown?

Which brings more to you,

You or what you own?

And which would cost you more

If it were gone?

The niggard pays,

The miser loses.

The least ashamed of men

Goes back if he chooses:

He knows both ways,

He starts again.

Fame or health, which is dearer to you?

Health or wealth, which is more important to you?

Gain or loss, which hurts you more?

The more you love something, the more you have to pay.

The more wealth you accumulate, the more likely you will lose it.

If you know when to be satisfied, you will not be insulted,

If you know when to stop, you will not be hurt,

This is how you last long.

Which is more precious, fame or health?

Which is more important, health or wealth?

Which is more painful, gaining or losing?

The more excessive is your attachment,

The greater is your suffering.

The more excessive is your possession,

The heavier is your loss.

To know what is enough is to be free from disgrace.

To know when to stop is to be free from danger.

Those who practice this will long endure.

Which is more precious, the body or the name?

Which is more important, the body or the goods?

Which is more harmful, gains or losses?

One who cares for reputation pays more.

One who possesses much fears death most.

Therefore,

One who is easily satisfied is not a disgrace.

One who knows where to stop is not stopped in life.

Fame or integrity, which do you hold most dear?

Your wealth or your life, to which will you cling?

Gain or loss, which one increases your anxiety?

In fame and wealth and gain can be found the seeds of failure,

And in integrity and life and loss can be found the root of treasures.

Thus it is that a contented person is never ashamed of what they have,

Having self-restraint he can avoid trouble,

In this way he can endure long, and live contentedly.

