===== Chapter 5 =====

Heaven and Earth are not humane

For the ten-thousand things are taken to be straw dogs.

Sages are not humane

For the hundred clans are taken to be straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth—

Its similarity to bellows and flutes?

Empty but not exhausted.

Use it and more and more is produced.

With too many words and ideas is distress.

This is not as good as staying in the middle.

Heaven and Earth are not kind: The ten thousand things are straw dogs to them.

The Sage is not kind: People are straw dogs to him.

Yet Heaven and Earth And all the space between Are like a bellows: Empty but inexhaustible, Always producing more.

Longwinded speech is exhausting. Better to stay centered.

Heaven and earth are impartial.

The myriad things have no lasting value for them.

The sage, too, is impartial.

The people have no lasting value for him.

The space between heaven and earth is like a bellows.

Though empty, it does not collapse.

Work it and it will always yield more.

Waste your breath and your strength is soon gone.

It is better to hold firm to the core.

NATURE

Nature is impartial -

While regarding All Things of the universe

as sacred,

Graces them with equality.

Likewise, the Sage is impartial -

While regarding all creatures as sacred,

Graces them with equality.

The universe - a moving bellows - Yin and Yang

always emptying - always full,

Endlessly working - endlessly yielding forth.

Understanding the nature of the universe

by words and by intellect,

Leads to exhaustion.

Hold instead to that intuition which,

Rising from the gut of mankind,

Resembles original nature.

Heaven and Earth do not have human sentiments.

Ten-thousand things (everything) have the importance of a straw dog.*

The sages are not sentimental, thus they act toward the hundred families (everyone) as if they are straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth is like the space inside of a flute!

It is hollow, yet does not get exhausted.

The more active it is, the more it produces.

Too many words bring about exhaustion.

It is better to hold your center.

* Straw dog: A sacrificial straw sculpture in the shape of a dog that was carefully maintained until it was used and then it was discarded.

THE FORMULA OF THE VACUUM

Heaven and earth proceed without motive, but casually in their order of

nature, dealing with all things carelessly, like used talismans. So also

the sages deal with their people, not exercising benevolence, but

allowing the nature of all to move without friction.

The
Space between heaven and earth is their breathing apparatus:

Exhalation is not exhaustion, but the complement of Inhalation, and this

equally of that. Speech exhausteth; guard thyself, therefore, maintaining

the perfect freedom of thy nature.

Heaven and earth know no preference. They look upon all beings as uponwooden animals. The sage knows no preference. He looks upon people as ifthey were made of wood. The space between heaven and earth is like an oceanof wind and the emptiness of which creation follows creation. Words cannotdescribe it. It must be perceived by one's inmost self.

The Creation does not pretend to be friendly

It treats all things impartially

One who is wise doesn't act friendly

All people are equal to him

The Universe is like bellows

Although empty, it fills continuously

The harder it works, the more it brings forth

The more you talk about it, the wearier you get

Therefore, you'd better stick to what really matters

Opposites are not sympathetic to each other. Each one of the many kinds of opposites acts as if it could get along without its other. But Nature treats opposites impartially, dealing with each of every pair of opposites with the same indifference.

And the intelligent man will regard opposites in the same manner.

No matter how deeply natures are torn by opposition, Nature itself remains unchanged. In conflicts between opposites, the more one attacks his seeming opponent (upon which he really depends for his completion), the more he defeats himself (and thereby demonstrates that only Nature, and not any opposite abstracted from existence, is self-sufficient).

So, likewise, no matter how much debaters argue, their argument proves nothing. Things are what they are, regardless of how much we disagree about them.

Heaven and Earth are ruthless;

To them the Ten Thousand things are but as straw dogs.

The Sage too is ruthless;

To him the people are but as straw dogs.

Yet Heaven and Earth and all that lies between

Is like a bellows

In that it is empty, but gives a supply that never fails.

Work it, and more comes out.

Whereas the force of words is soon spent.

Far better is it to keep what is in the heart.

The realm of heaven and earth is indifferent to the myriad creatures.

They appear as straw dogs.

The sage is indifferent to the multitudes of men.

They appear as straw dogs.

The realm of heaven and earth is like a bellows,

both empty and full.

Moving, it brings forth, endlessly.

More words, less understanding.

Hold fast to the core.

Heaven & earth are not compassionate

Treating the myriad beings as straw dogs

Wise ones are not compassionate

Regarding the hundred families as straw dogs

The space between heaven & earth

How this is like bellows & flutes!

Empty, yet never exhausted

(When) moved then more is produced

Lots of words adds up to exhaustion,

(This is) never as good as holding the center

Nature

Heaven and Earth are impartial;

They regard the ten thousand things as straw dogs.

The wise are impartial;

He regards the common people as straw dogs.

The space between heaven and Earth -

Is it not like a bellows?.

It is empty but not depleted;

Move it and more [always] comes out.

Much learning means frequent exhausting.

That is not so good as holding on to the mean.

Heaven and Earth are not sentimental; they regard all things as dispensable.

The sage isn't sentimental, either; He views all forms as ephemeral and transitional.

Tao is like a bellows: empty but inexhaustible. The more you move it the more it makes.

Too much talk about it evaporates your understanding, though. Simply stay at the center of the circle.

Equality is the Cosmic Way:

Good and evil are born of fantasy.

The Sage is neither partisan nor punishing:

No one is special, no one excluded.

Consciousness breathes,

Expands and contracts.

It never varies, and each moment is unique.

Work with this and understand;

Talk about it, and you lose your center.

Nature is indifferent to life.

It realizes everything is as a straw dog

(a sacrificial animal-image).

The truly wise are also indifferent to life.

They realize humanity is as a straw dog.

The
universe is like a bellows:

empty, yet quite full.

As it proceeds, it produces.

Much
talk, much exhaustion.

Keep your thoughts within!

Nature is non-benevolent. It regards the masses as straw dogs.

The Holy Man is non-benevolent. He regards the masses as straw dogs.

The space between the heaven and the earth is like a bellows; though unsupported, it does not warp; when in motion the more it expels.

Though words could exhaust this theme, they would not be so profitable as the preservation of its inner essence.

Heaven and earth do not own their benevolence, To them all things are straw dogs

The Sage does not own his benevolence; To him the people are straw dogs.

The space between heaven and earth is like a (blacksmith's) bellows. Hollow as it seems, nothing is lacking. If it is moved, more will it bring forth.

He who talks more is sooner exhausted: It is better to keep what is within himself.

Natural Guidance

Heaven-earth [the cosmos] is not kind. It treats the 10,000 natural kinds as
straw dogs.

Sages are not kind. They treat the hundred surname-groups as straw dogs.

Is the space between Heaven and earth not like bellows and flutes?

Empty and not warped.

As long as you move them, they produce.

Many words and numbers unlimited are not as good as holding the center.

Heaven and earth are not benevolent:

They treat ten thousand things indifferently.

The wise is not benevolent:

He treats men indifferently.

The entire universe is basically void, like a bellows:

When it is in non-action, it does not lack anything;

When it is in action, it is even more productive.

Debating with words leads to limitations.

Therefore, nothing is better than to remain in the state before things are stirred.

Heaven and Earth treat all creatures as they treat a straw dog:

with great kindness.

The sage treats the people as he treats a straw dog:

with great kindness.

Between Heaven and Earth there is a big void;

it is like a bag without a seam,

it is like the hole in a bamboo flute.

This void cannot be overpowered:

the more it moves, the more it yields.

Many words lead to less understanding, therefore it is best to guard the void.

Heaven and earth are unfeeling,

Treating the ten thousand things like straw and dogs;

The sage man was unfeeling,

Treating the hundred family names like straw and dogs.

The space between heaven and earth -

Is it not like a bellows?

Empty yet inexhaustible.

The more it operates, the more it emits.

Much learning brings a quick end.

Better adhere to the middle.

Heaven and earth do not own all things,

For them, things are like straw dogs.

The sage does not own his words,

For him, all people are like straw dogs.

The hollow space that lies between heaven and earth is like the blacksmith's bellows.

Hollow in appearance, nothing is lacking,

And if it moves, a lot of what is in it moves.

The person who speaks a lot will be exhausted.

It would be better for him to keep his words to himself.

Heaven and earth are ruthless, and treat the myriad creatures as straw dogs;

the sage is ruthless, and treats the people as straw dogs.

Is
not the space between heaven and earth like a bellows?

It is empty without being exhausted:

The more it works the more comes out.

Much
speech leads inevitably to silence.

Better to hold fast to the void.

The Function of Emptiness

But for heaven and earth's humaneness, the ten thousand things are straw dogs. But for the holy man's humaneness, the hundred families are straw dogs.

Is not the space between heaven and earth like unto a bellows? It is empty; yet it collapses not. It moves, and more and more comes forth.[But]

"How soon exhausted is

A gossip's fulsome talk!

And should we not prefer

On the middle path to walk?"

The Tao is impartial; good and evil both reside herein. The master is impartial, and regards all as equal. The Tao contains nothing but is able to create anything. As it is used, it produces. If you talk of it your understanding will grow dim. Remain impartial.

The universe is ignoble; it regards myriad matters as straw dogs.

The sage is ignoble; he/she regards the gentry as straw dogs.

Is the universe not a wind tunnel?

Inexhaustible at rest; dynamic at its fiercest.

More rules yield faster demise.

Laissez-faire is a better device.

Heaven and earth are Inhumane:

they use the ten thousand things like straw dogs.

And the sage too is Inhumane:

he uses the hundred-fold people like straw dogs.

Is all heaven and earth

really so much like a bellows-chamber?

It's empty but never contracts,

just keeps bringing forth more and more.

Words go on failing and failing, nothing like abiding in its midst.

Heaven and earth are inhumane,

They treat all things like straw dogs;

The rule is inhumane,

He treats his people like straw dogs.

Between the heaven and earth, is it like a bellows?

It is empty yet inexhaustible; and

More agitations produce even more disturbances.

Much arguments are destined to end,

It is better to remain with the central core.

Heavens
and earth are without humanizing

It happens that the 10000 things act as straw dogs

Sages are without humanizing

It happens that one hundred families act as straw dogs.

The
space bounding heavens and earth is just like the equal of a bellows

Empty yet not subdued

Stirring yet more goes out.

Much
talk counts for little

It can't compare to obeying the center.

Heaven and earth are not good to the things that they produce, but treat them like straw dogs.

Like heaven and earth, the Sage is not good for the people he governs, but treats them like straw dogs.

The betwixt of heaven and earth, seat of the Principle, the place from where its virtue acts, is like a bellows, like the bag of a bellows of which heaven and earth would be the two boards, which empties itself without exhausting itself, which moves itself externally without cease.

This is all that we can understand of the Principle and of its action as producer. To seek to detail it further using words and numbers would be a waste of time. Let us hold ourselves to this grand idea.

Heaven and Earth are without bias

And regard myriad things as straw dogs

The sage is without bias

And regards people as straw dogs

The space between Heaven and Earth

Is it not like a bellows?

Empty, and yet never exhausted

It moves, and produces more

Too many words hasten failure

Cannot compare to keeping quiet

Straw dogs are literally small dog figurines made from straws. They were used in ancient times for rituals.

Too many words / laws quicken defeat / failure

Cannot compare to keeping quiet

An alternative explanation of the above is that too much bureaucracy, too many rules and regulations quickly leads to weakness and failure; it is better to maintain tranquility and non-action.

This is an often misunderstood passage in Tao Te Ching, even by native speakers of Chinese, because some of the characters have a completely different meaning in ancient usage than in modern times.

For instance, this is a simple character meaning "middle," so many scholars assume the last line has to do with holding to the center, or perhaps holding to the principle of moderation. This would make more sense, though, if the previous line speaks of the danger of extremes. Now that we understand it refers to the maddening "noise" of complex and bureaucratic laws, it makes far more sense that the last line is really talking about silence and tranquility.

Heaven and earth are not like humans, they are impartial. They regard all things as insignificant, as though they were playthings made of straw. The wise man is also impartial. To him all men are alike and unimportant. The space between heaven and earth is like a bellows, it is empty but does not collapse; it moves and more and more issues. A gossip is soon empty, it is doubtful if he can be impartial.

Heaven and earth are not humane (jen),

They treat the ten thousand beings as straw dogs (ch'u kou).

The sage is not humane (jen),

He treats the hundred families as straw dogs (ch'u kou).

Between heaven and earth,

How like a bellows (t'o yo) it is!

Empty and yet inexhaustible,

Moving and yet it pours out ever more.

By many words one's reckoning (shu) is exhausted.

It is better to abide by the center (shou chung).

Nature is indifferent to life. It realizes everything is as a straw dog. The truly wise are also indifferent to life. They realize humanity is as a straw dog.

The universe is like a bellows: empty, yet quite full. As it proceeds, it produces.

Much talk, much exhaustion. Keep your thoughts within!

The Tao is impartial; it sees all things as straw [fake] dogs.

The Tao–Master is also impartial; he regards people as straw dogs.

The Tao is like a bellows: it is empty yet infinitely available.

It is always producing.

Speak of it, fail to grasp it.

Hold on to the center.

Five

Heaven and Earth are impartial;

They see the ten thousand things as straw dogs.

The wise are impartial;

They see the people as straw dogs.

The space between heaven and Earth is like a bellows.

The shape changes but not the form;

The more it moves, the more it yields.

More words count less.

Hold fast to the center.

Heaven and earth are not merciful,

They treat all things as straw dogs;

The sage is not merciful,

He treats the people as straw dogs.

Does not the space between heaven and earth form like a bellows?

It is empty but (the air in it) can never be exhausted;

The more air it expels, the more comes out.

That is why too many government decrees only result in more failures.

It is better, therefore, to hold fast to moderation and the void.

Heaven and Earth are not humane:

They treat the ten thousand things as straw dogs.

The sage is not humane:

He treats the people as straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth -

Is it not as though it were a bellows?

It is empty, yet inexhaustible.

Ever active, it gives off more and more.

Much talk inevitably leads to predicament.

It is better to hold on to the void.

Nature is impartial;

It treats everything like sacrificial straw dogs.

The sage is also indifferent;

He regards everyone as sacrificial straw dogs.

The universe is just like a bellows.

Though empty and intangible, it is never spent.

The more you use it, the more briskly it carries on.

But to argue excessively will definitely come to a dead end.

It is best to maintain the central core of human nature.

The Utility of Hollowness

Hsu Yung

Heaven and Earth are not kindly;

They equate the ten thousand things with straw dogs.

The Sage is not kindly;

He equates the people with straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth,

Is it not like a bellows?

It is hollow, yet it never fails to supply.

The more it is worked, the more it gives forth.

Much talk often leads to exhaustion.

Better concentrate on the center.

Heaven and Earth do not claim to be kindhearted or pitiful.

To them all things and all creatures are as straw dogs brought to the sacrifice and afterwards discarded.

Nor is the Sage kindhearted or pitiful.

To him to the people are as straw dogs.

But the space between Heaven and Earth may be likened to a bellows:

It seems empty, and yet it gives all that is required of it.

The more it is worled, the more it yields.

Whereas the force puffed up by words is soon exhausted.

Better to hold fast to that which dwells within the heart.

Heaven-and-earth is not humane:

It treats the ten thousand things like straw dogs.

The sage is not humane:

He treats the hundred families like straw dogs.

Heaven-and-earth and all between

Is like a bellows:

Empty but never used up.

The more it moves,

The more comes out of it.

Many words exhaust truth.

Keep to the empty center.

The subtle virtue of the universe is wholeness.

It regards all things as equal.

The virtue of the sage is wholeness.

He too regards all things as equal.

The universe may be compared to a bellows.

It is empty, yet it never fails to generate its products.

The more it moves, the more it brings forth.

Many words lead one nowhere.

Many pursuits in different directions bring only exhaustion.

Rather, embrace the subtle essence within.

V.

Using
Emptiness

The
ways which heaven and earth pursue are not benevolent,

They
treat the myriad things as sacrificial dogs of grass,

And so
the sages, comprehending nature s argument,

Regard
the hundred families, too, as grass-dogs when they pass.

Heaven
and earth a bellows are, which emptied from its strain

Collapses
not, but moved again produces more and more,

But
men who talk and talk exhaust themselves, and talk in vain,

And
all unlikely are to keep the middle path secure.

Heaven and earth are impartial, they regard all creatures as sacred.

The self-controlled man is impartial, he regards all people as sacred.

The space between Heaven and Earth is like a bellows.

Emptied, it loses not power,

Moved, it sends forth more and more wind.

Many words lead to exhaustion.

Be not thus; keep to thy center.

Heaven-and-Earth
is

not
sentimental;

It
treats all things

like
straw dogs

(equal).

The
Complete Thinker is

not
sentimental;

Treats
all people

as
straw dogs

(
equally).

Between
Heaven and Earth,

There
seems to be

a
Bellows:

It
is empty,

yet
it can

not
be emptied;

The
more it works,

the
more comes

out
of it.

The
Complete Thinker

draws
upon the universal experience

thus
cannot be exhausted.

Better
look for it

within
you.

The
Tao (the Laws of the Universe) is

in
all that exists.

Heaven and earth are not humane: they treat the ten thousand things like (sacrificial) straw dogs.

The Saints are not humane: they treat the people like (sacrificial) straw dogs.

The space between heaven and earth, - how like a bellows it is! It is emptied without being exhausted. It is put in motion and it brings forth more and more.

A multiplicity of words is soon exhausted; better it is to preserve a middle course.

Heaven and earth do not act from (the impulse of) any wish to be

benevolent; they deal with all things as the dogs of grass are dealt

with. The sages do not act from (any wish to be) benevolent; they

deal with the people as the dogs of grass are dealt with.

May
not the space between heaven and earth be compared to a

bellows?

'Tis
emptied, yet it loses not its power;

'Tis moved again, and sends forth air the more.

Much speech to swift exhaustion lead we see;

Your inner being guard, and keep it free.

Id and Super-Ego are not 'human.' They treat all things as
'Totemic
Symbols.'
The
Sages, too, are not merely 'human;' they too treat all creatures as

'Totemic Symbols.'
This
relating between Id and Super-Ego: how like a bellows it is!
Empty
but inexhaustible, the more it pumps, the more comes out of it.
Most
Ego-speech is merely exhausting. Better to remain with 'Totemic
Symbols!'

This
emptiness is truly void

And infinitely capacious

It holds whatever comes its way

Eternally tenacious

Can
you take whatever comes?

Though judgment calls it bad and good

Seeing is acceptance

And nothing to be understood

HEAVEN-and-Earth is not sentimental;

It treats all things as straw-dogs.

The Sage is not sentimental;

He treats all his people as straw-dogs.

Between Heaven and Earth,

There seems to be a Bellows:

It is empty, and yet it is inexhaustible;

The more it works, the more comes out of it.

No amount of words can fathom it:

Better look for it within you.

The Sage does not take sides,

He welcomes both saints and sinners.

The Tao works upon man as it works upon the grasses of the fields.

Sages act out of the need for rightness, not purely compassion.

The Tao is like a bellows, even though it appears empty, its workings are obvious,

Yet the more you use it the more it produces, it is inexhaustible.

Yet speaking of it will not increase the comprehension.

Hold to the center path.

Heaven and Earth are impartial;

they treat all of creation as straw dogs.

The Master doesn't take sides;

she treats everyone like a straw dog.

The
space between Heaven and Earth is like a bellows;

it is empty, yet has not lost its power.

The more it is used, the more it produces;

the more you talk of it, the less you comprehend.

It
is better not to speak of things you do not understand.

Natural law is blind, its justice evenhanded. The consequences of one's behaviour are inescapable. Being human is no excuse.

The wise leader does not try to protect people from themselves. The light of awareness shines equally on what is pleasant and what is not pleasant.

People are not better than the rest of creation. The same principle which underlies human beings underlies everything equally.

Neither is one person or one people better than the rest of humanity. The same principle is everywhere. One person is as worthy of the next. Why play favourites?

Everything demonstrates the law. Just because God is not a thing does not mean God is nothing. A little humility is in order.

Knowing this, the leader does not pretend to be special. The leader does not gossip about others or waste breath arguing the merits of competing theories.

Silence is a great source of strength.

Heaven and Earth are impartial,

They allow things to die.

The Sage is not sentimental,

She knows that All beings must pass away.

The space between Heaven and Earth is like a bellows

Empty, yet inexhaustible

The more it is used, the more it produces.

Trying to explain, it will only exhaust you.

It is better to hold on to ambiguity.

Heaven
and earth are indifferent.

All creatures are considered straw dogs;

not distinguished, not judged.

The
sage is indifferent.

All people are one;

not distinguished, not judged.

Infinity
is like a bellows,

empty yet encompassing the potential

of all things.

In
time all potentials manifest.

Words
are straw in the wind.

The more one talks, the less one says.

Keep
focused on Infinity.

Remain centered in the oneness of

all things.

Heaven and Earth are not benevolent,

treating all things as straw dogs.

The wise man is not compassionate,

governing all people as straw dogs.

Is Heaven and Earth not like a bellows;

Empty and straight, then active and fruitful ?

Words are often inadequate, unlike keeping the center.

Heaven and Earth are not benevolent;

They regard the Ten Thousand Things as straw dogs.1

The Sage is not benevolent;

He regards the Hundred Families2 as straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth is like a bellows:

It is empty, yet not exhausted;

The more it is used, the more it produces.

Many words exhaust themselves.

It is better to watch over what is within.3

1. Straw dogs were made to be sacrificial offerings at religious ceremonies. Afterwards, having served their purpose, they would be thrown away and trampled under foot in the street or burned as fuel. (See Ch'en Ku-ying 1977, 70, P. J. Lin 1977, 12, Wilhelm 1985, 65, Welch 1966, 42, and Wieger 1988, 88.)

2. i.e. all people.

3. presumably, the Tao. But the 'empty centre' may well be alluding to the bellows simile already introduced; if this is so, the 'empty centre' of the bellows should be likened to the space between Heaven and Earth. This space is where mankind dwells, and this line may be an exhortation discouraging people from presuming too much, or taking on tasks beyond their capacity. This interpretation at least accords with the general philosophy of the Tao Te Ching. Cf. Welch (1966, 44–5) for an illuminating analysis of this chapter.

The universe benefits none

And takes every being for a straw dog.

The wise king benefits none

And takes all people for nothing dearer.

Should we say that

It is just like bellows between Heaven and Earth?

It is empty but well propped up,

And any stir in it will cause spilling.

After all moralization and calculation,

It is a better strategy to keep that bellows empty.

"Heaven and Earth are not Good they treat the thousands of things like straw dogs

The Wise Person is not Good he treats the hundred clans like straw dogs."

The space between heaven and earth isn't it like a bellows? Empty, but not shriveled up, set it in motion and always more comes out.

Much talking, quickly exhausted. It can't compare to watching over what is inside.

The matter — both in the sky and on the earth — is dispassionate toward all creatures, be they plants, animals, people. Though, it is the base for all of them.

In the same way, the wise is dispassionate toward others.

The space above the earth is void and free like the space inside a bellows or a flute. The more there is space for action, the more efficient the action can be.

He, who interferes with actions of others and talks too much becomes unbearable for people.

Therefore, it is always better to follow the principle of non-interference and keep calm.

Nature is not biased by anything,

Sees everything with equal potential.

Similarly, the Wise one doesn't have preferences,

For him, everyone is seen equally.

The
universe in infinite,

In it there is everything.

By moving, creates,

Moving more, more things appear.

Too
much talking results in tiredness,

The best to keep is the middle way.

Heaven
and Earth are not benevolent. They take the myriad creatures to be straw dogs.
The Sage is not benevolent. He takes the common people to be straw dogs.

The
space between Heaven and Earth is like a bellows. It is void and yet does not
collapse. The more it moves the more it sends out.

An
excess of talk [aimed at fathoming the universe] is fated to become impoverished.
It is better to hold [it] inside.

Without kindness heaven and earth treat all things as straw dogs.

Without kindness the Sage treats the people as straw dogs.

The space between heaven and earth is a vacuum like a bellows,

Emptied, but inexhaustible.

The more it moves, the more it yields.

Too much talk often brings exhaustion.

Is it not better to keep to the middle path?

Holding to the Center

Heaven and Earth are impartial;

They regard All Things as straw dogs.

Evolved Individuals are impartial;

They regard all people as straw dogs.

Between Heaven and Earth,

The space is like a bellows.

The shape changes,

But not the form.

The more it moves,

The more it produces.

Too much talk will exhaust itself.

It is better to remain centered.

Nature does not make one species evil or another pleasant. Nor does she judge the species of their actions. A bird of prey can pounce a harmless mouse. A doe can sip from the river. Each is the same. It does not matter.

Is then the world unkind?

And does it treat all things

Like straw dogs used in magic rites?

The Wise Man too, is he unkind?

And does he treat the folk

Like straw dogs made to throw away?

Between
the earth and sky

The space is like a bellows,

Empty but unspent.

When moved its gift is copious.

Much
talk means much exhaustion;

Better far it is to keep your thoughts!

Heaven and Earth cannot be called benevolent letting all things emerge or perish of themselves.

The sage cannot be called benevolent letting all people live or die by themselves.

Isn't between Heaven and Earth like a bellows?

While vacuous, it is not inexhaustible;

The more it is drawn off, the more air it sends forth.

Much talk is doomed to a dead end,

It is better to keep to moderation.

Heaven and Earth are not benevolent and treat the myriad things as straw dogs

The sage is not benevolent and treats the common folk as straw dogs.

The space between Heaven and Earth, is it not just like a bellows or a mouth organ!

Empty, it can never be used up.

Active, it produces all the more.

Many words lead to quick exhaustion; better to maintain emptiness within.

1. Heaven and Earth are not humane;

2. They regard the the thousand things as straw dogs.

3. The Sage is not humane;

4. He regards the common people as straw dogs.

5.
The space between Heaven and Earth—is it not like a bellow?

6. It is empty and yet not depleted;

7. Move it and more [always] comes out.

8. Much learning means frequent exhaustions.

9. That's not so good as holding on to the mean.

Tao's neutral:

it doesn't care about good or evil.

The Masters are neutral:

they treat everyone the same.

Tao is like
a bellows:

It's empty, but it could help set the world on fire.

If you keep using Tao, it works better.

If you keep talking about it, it won't make any sense.

Keep cool.

.

Emptiness and the Center

Nature is not humane.

It treats all things like sacrificial objects.

The wise are not humane.

They regard people like sacrificial objects.

How the universe is like a bellows!

While empty, it is never exhausted.

The more it is worked, the more it produces.

Much talk brings exhaustion.

It is better to keep to the center.

The universe does not measure according to human standards

It is equally close to everything and pervades everything without distinction.

Likewise the Awakened Man:

He is close to all beings affirming all as holy without exception.

Like a bellows is the universe:

Although empty it does not collapse.

In motion it produces more and more.

Likewise the Sage:

Non-inflated he does not exhaust himself in idle words.

Moved from within he draws and gives from the fullness of the universe.

The Heaven And The Earth Are Not Benevolent

Lao Tze says,

When Heaven and Earth proceed their works, they do not consider benevolence,

they regard all things as straw-made dogs.

When the sage proceeds his work, he does not consider benevolence,

he regards all people as straw-made dogs.

Between Heaven and Earth, space functions like a blacksmith's bellow.

It is void, but is not out of function.

Once it is set in motion, a continuous stream of production will issue from it.

And the people who like to talk face the same consequence;

the more they talk, the more shortage others will know.

There is no better way than to model after the Tao, and keep oneself in the void state also.

WITHOUT INTENTION

Nature
acts without intent,

so cannot be described

as acting with benevolence,

nor malevolence to any thing.

In
this respect, the Tao is just the same,

though in reality it should be said

that nature follows the rule of Tao.

Therefore,
even when he seems to act

in manner kind or benevolent,

the sage is not acting with such intent,

for in conscious matters such as these,

he is amoral and indifferent.

The
sage retains tranquility,

and is not by speech or thought disturbed,

and even less by action which is contrived.

His actions are spontaneous,

as are his deeds towards his fellow men.

By
this means he is empty of desire,

and his energy is not drained from him.

The Tao doesn't take sides;

it gives birth to both good and evil.

The Master doesn't take sides;

she welcomes both saints and sinners.

The Tao is like a bellows:

it is empty yet infinitely capable.

The more you use it, the more it produces;

the more you talk of it, the less you understand.

Hold on to the center.

Heaven and earth are not benevolent because they make All Things sacrificial victims.

Sage rulers were not benevolent because they punished the people as sacrificial victims.

Between the heavens and the earth there is nothing but an empty space!

It may be compared to a bellow or pocket of vast capacity.

Humbly modest but not submissive.

The more it moves, changes, the more nearly perfect it becomes.

Excess means Extreme.

It is better to hold fast to perfection.

Nature has no benevolence,

It treats all things like strawdogs;

The sage has no benevolence,

He treats his people like strawdogs.

Between heaven and earth it seems like a bellows:

Empty, yet inexhaustible,

The stronger it is activated, the greater the output.

Being overly informed leads to exhaustion,

Better to be centered.

V

Nature
is not well mannered

It watches creatures be born and die without comment

Nor is the taoist well mannered

People are born and they die, and that's as it should be

Life
is like a fan

So long as it moves the breeze continues

But stop the one so you can master the other, and what's left to master?

Don't try to answer, you'll only frustrate yourself

Who
can define life or death? Knowing they are is enough.

Heaven and Earth

Heaven and earth are not humane;

they regard all beings as straw dogs.

Sages are not humane;

they see all people as straw dogs.

The space between heaven and earth

is like bellows and pipes,

empty yet inexhaustible,

producing more with movement.

The talkative reach their wits' end

again and again;

that is not as good as keeping centered.

Heaven and earth have no bias; they treat everything as if they are the straw dogs used in ritual;

Rulers have no biases; they treat citizens as if they are the straw dogs.

The world is like the bellows.

When it is static, its ability to blow is not lost.

When it is moving, it generates more and more wind.

To go extreme is not as good as to stay normal.

Heaven and Earth are not sentimental; they treat all things as straw-dogs.

The sage is not sentimental; he treats all his people as straw-dogs.

Between Heaven and Earth, there seems to be a bellows: it is empty, and yet it is inexhaustible; the more it works, the more it produces.

No amount of words can fathom it: Better look for it in the middle.

Heaven and earth have no Jen, use everything as guinea pigs.

Sages have no Jen, use people as guinea pigs.

The Universe, as a bellows;

Empty it, yet not bend.

Move it, yet more yield.

Say too much, less is understood.

Better hold fast to the center.

Heaven and earth are not moved

by offerings of straw-dogs.

The Trne Person is not moved

by offerings of straw-dogs.

The
space between heaven and earth is like a bellows.

It is empty and yet never exhausted.

The more it works the more comes out.

Many
words lead to exhaustion.

Better to hold fast to your center.

The
earth and the universe

have no attachments.

Everything is dust

to them, within them.

So, too, the wise

have no permanent attachments.

To them also

people are dust, ideas are dust.

Still, the earth is like a fan:

empty,

never filled,

constantly giving.

The more it works,

the more it gives.

The
more one speaks

of theism or atheism,

the less is understood.

Better to keep quiet

and look inside.

The universe seems without mercy, quite ruthless;

in that wider perspective all things are but as ritual straw dogs.

The wise man too is hard as nail; to him the people are but as straw dogs to
throw.

Yet
heaven and earth and all that lies between is like a bellows;

empty, yet yielding a supply that hardly fails.

Work it, and more comes out.

Whereas the force of words is soon spent.

It seems far better to keep what's in the heart.

So hold to the heart core and a regular mean.

Heaven and earth are inhumane;

they view the myriad creatures as straw dogs.

The sage is inhumane;

he views the common people as straw dogs.

The space between heaven and earth, how like a bellows it is!

Empty but never exhausted,

The more it pumps, the more comes out.

Hearing too much leads to utter exhaustion;

Better to remain in the center.

Neither Heaven nor Earth has any predilections; they regard all persons and things as sacrificial images.

The wise man knows no distinctions; he beholds all men as things made for holy uses.

The celestial space is like unto bellows though containing nothing that is solid, it does not at any time collapse; and the more it is set in motion, the more does it produce.

The inflated man, however, is soon exhausted.

Than self-restraint there is nothing better.

Welcome Each Other

Love dances through the cosmos,

binding together all that is.

Every living thing is welcomed

with never a word of criticism.

Welcome each other

with the same expansiveness.

What pleases you

and does not please you

is of no importance.

Welcome is all that matters.

Can you merely notice the things you like or dislike,

without attaching importance to them

or altering the nature of your openness and acceptance?

What will be your first words

when next you meet your beloved?

Will they speak of spacious welcoming?

Heaven and Earth are not humane. They regard all things a straw dogs.

The sage is not humane. He regards all people as straw dogs.

How Heaven and Earth are like a bellows. While vacuous, it is never exhausted. When active, it produces even more.

Much talk will of course come to a dead end. It is better to keep to the centre.

Nature, immune
as to a sacrifice of straw dogs,

Faces the decay of its fruits.

A sound man, immune as to a sacrifice of straw dogs,

Faces the passing of human generations.

The universe, like a bellows,

Is always emptying, always full:

The more it yields, the more it holds.

Men came to their wit's end arguing about it

And had better meet it at the marrow.

Nature is not charitable; it neglects everything like a used grass-dog after sacrifice.

Great men were not charitable; they neglected people like a used grass-dog after sacrifice.

Between heaven and earth, is it not like a pair of bellows?

Empty, but always able to produce wind; the more you push, the more wind comes out.

Talking too much will lead to embarrassment: be like the bellows and keep the wind inside.

The Kosmos is not humane;

Impartially, it treats all things as transitory.

The sage is not humane;

Impartially, he treats all people as transitory.

Manifesting the Tao Eternal,

The kosmic space is like a bellows.

Empty, yet inexhaustible,

The more one activates it, the more it generates.

Being full, too many words lead one nowhere;

Impartially, keep to the silent core of emptiness.

The universe benefits none

And takes every being for a straw dog.

The wise king benefits none

And takes all people for nothing dearer.

Should we say that

It is just like bellows between Heaven and Earth?

It is empty but well propped up,

And any stir in it will cause spilling.

After all moralization and calculation,

It is a better strategy to keep that bellows empty.

The Sage does not take sides,

He welcomes both saints and sinners.

The Tao works upon man as it works upon the grasses of the fields.

Sages act out of the need for rightness, not purely compassion.

The Tao is like a bellows, even though it appears empty, its workings are obvious,

Yet the more you use it the more it produces, it is inexhaustible.

Yet speaking of it will not increase the comprehension.

Hold to the center path.

