===== Chapter 78 =====

There is nothing in the world as flexible and weak as water.

And [among] those things that work at the firm and the strong

There is nothing that can surpass it [in this]

For it is without means [for the hard and strong] to alter it.

The victory of the weak over the strong

The victory of the flexible over the firm

There are none in the world who do not know [of these].

None who cannot practice [them].

Therefore do the sages say:

"Accepting the filth of the kingdom—

This is called taking charge of the gods of soil and the gods of grain.

To accept the banes of the kingdom—

This is to become the ruler of the world."

Correct sayings seem contradictory.

Nothing in the world is soft and weak as water. But when attacking the hard and strong Nothing can conquer so easily.

Weak overcomes strong, soft overcomes hard. Everyone knows this, no one attains it.

Therefore the Sage says: Accept a country's filth And become master of
its sacred soil. Accepts country's ill fortune And become king under
heaven. True words resemble their opposites.

There is nothing in the world softer than water.

And there's nothing weaker.

Yet for attacking the hard and strong

There is nothing better.

There is no substitute for it.

What is weak defeats what's strong.

What is soft defeats what's hard.

This is something known to all.

Yet this knowledge is used by none.

That's why the sage declares:

"If you bear the country's dishonor

You become the lord of its shrines.

If you bear the country's misfortune

You become the king of the world."

True words seem to sound wrong.

THE CHARACTER OF WATER

Flowing water -

Being softer and more yielding than all else under the heavens,

Has no equal in attacking and prevailing against that which is hard and resistant.

The supple, weak and yielding, thereby,

Conquer the rigid, strong and resistant.

While this is known by all mankind,

Few are they who can flow in this manner.

Thus the Sage -

By accepting the disgrace and humiliation of the community,

Is called a leader in the community.

By receiving the burdens and misfortunes of the nation,

Becomes a ruler of the nation.

Surely these words, while paradoxical, are true.

Heaven below (the sacred body) is not as soft and yielding as water, yet can take on the rigid and violent.

Without its (the sacred body's) ability to overcome the rigid and the violent, it is nothing.

It replaces violence with gentleness.

It overcomes violence.

Tenderly it overcomes the unyielding.

Without knowing this, no one in Heaven below can progress.

The sages speak of guarding the community:

Dishonor comes from making sacrifices to the gods.

Preserve the community, not its omens.

It is correct to speak of Heaven below as what connects Heaven,

Humanity and Earth.

The words of the person who sacrifices backfire.

A CREED

Nothing in the world is more elastic and yielding than water; yet it is

preeminent to dissolve things rigid and resistant; there is nothing which

can match it.

All
men know that the soft overcometh the hard, and the weak conquereth

the strong; but none are able to use this law in action.

A
Wise Man hath said: 'He that taketh on the burden of the state is a

demigod worthy of sacrificial worship; and the true King of a people is

he that undertaketh the weight of their sorrows.'

Truth
appeareth paradox.

There is nothing in the world more soft and weak than water, and yetfor attacking things that are firm and strong there is nothing that cantake precedence of it;-for there is nothing (so effectual) for which itcan be changed. Every one in the world knows that the soft overcomes thehard, and the weak the strong, but no one is able to carry it out in practice.Therefore a sage has said

'He who accepts his state's reproach, Is altars' lord; To him who bearsmen's direful woes They all the name of King accord.'

Words that are strictly true seem to be paradoxical.

Nothing in life is so soft and compliant as water

Nothing is stronger in breaking what is hard and strong

Nothing can exceed it in doing this

Weak overcomes strong

Soft overcomes hard

Nobody knows this

And no one practices it

Therefore the sage says:

One who is the least in the world, will be the greatest in life

One who carries the sorrow of the world, is the greatest among mankind

It sounds odd, but it's true

Nothing is weaker than water; Yet, for attacking what is hard and tough, Nothing surpasses it, nothing equals it.

The principle, that what is weak overcomes what is strong, And what is yielding conquers what is resistant, Is known to everybody. Yet few men utilize it profitably in practice.

But the intelligent man knows that: He who willingly takes the blame for disgrace to his community is considered a responsible person, And he who submissively accepts responsibility for the evils in his community naturally will be given enough authority for dealing with them. These principles, no matter how paradoxical, are sound.

Nothing under heaven is softer or more yielding than water;

But when it attacks things hard and resistant there is not one of them that can prevail.

For they can find no way of altering it.

That the yielding conquers the resistant

And the soft conquers the hard is a fact known by all men,

Yet utilized by none.

Yet it is in reference to this that the Sage said

"Only he who has accepted the dirt of the country can be lord of its soil shrines;

Only he who takes upon himself the evils of the country

Can become a king among those what dwell under heaven."

Straight words seem crooked.

In all the world nothing is softer and weaker than water.

Yet for overcoming the hard and strong it is unequaled.

The pliant overcomes the unbending.

The submissive overcomes the unyielding.

Everyone knows this but no one puts it into practice.

Therefore the sage says:

He who takes on the suffering of the world is fit to rule it.

One who accepts the evils of the world as his own

is a king under heaven.

Truth is often a paradox.

(In all) the world there is nothing

as adaptable & soft as water

Yet of that which attacks the hard & inflexible

Nothing can surpass it

Because there is no way easier than this

The gentle finally overcomes the firm

The adaptable finally overcomes the persistent

There is no one under heaven

who cannot comprehend (this)

(But) no one can practice (it)

So it is that wise ones maintain:

To accept the country's soil

May in truth be called mastering the altars of place & grain

To accept the realm's misfortunes

Is in truth to serve as sovereign to the world

Straightforward words may seem turned around

Accept responsability

In the whole world nothing is softer

and weaker than water.

And yet for attacking the solid and strong,

nothing can beat it,

Because there is nothing that can replace it.

That water can defeat the strong -

That the weak can defeat the strong -

There is no one in the world that does not know it,

and yet there is no one who can put it into practice.

For this reason, the words of the Sage say:

To take on yourself the disgrace of the state -

This is called being the lord of earth and grain;

To assume responsability for all ill-omened events in the state -

This is called being the king of the World.

Correct words seem to say the reverse

Of what you expect them to say.

Nothing under heaven is as soft and yielding as water. Yet for attacking the hard and strong, nothing can compare with it.

The weak overcomes the strong. The soft overcomes the hard. Everyone knows this, but none have the ability to practice it.

Therefore the sage says: One who accepts the dung of the nation becomes the master of soil and sustenance. One who deals with the evils of the nation becomes king under heaven. True words seem paradoxical.

Is there anything in all of Nature

As adaptable and as shapeless as water?

But for wearing down what's fixed and rigid,

No power on earth can match it.

Thus, it is unique.

When an amorphous presence

Meets adamantine resistance,

The amorphous prevails.

When the supple meets the obdurate,

Suppleness prevails.

There are none who can deny this,

But no one seems able to live by it.

Thus the Sage teaches that

The humiliation of one's country

Is not to be taken upon one's self,

Nor are environmental disasters

To be conquered as enemies.

But we can, with subtle understanding,

Communicate with them.

Nothing in the world is weaker

or more yielding than water.

Yet nothing is its equal

in wearing away the hard and strong.

There is nothing quite like it.

Thus
the weak can overpower the strong;

the flexible can overcome the rigid.

The whole world can perceive this,

but does not put it into practice.

And
so the truly wise say:

Whoever bears the shame of the nation

is fit to lead the nation.

Whoever bears the sins of the world

is fit to lead the world.

Straight
words (truth)

can seem crooked (paradoxical).

Nothing is so flexible as water, yet for attacking that which is hard nothing surpasses it. There is nothing which supplants it.

The weak overcomes the strong, the soft control the hard. Everyone knows this, but no one practices it.

Hence a Sage has said – "Who bears his country's reproach is hailed as the lord of his nation's altars. Who bears his country's misfortunes is called the Empire's chief."

Truth, when expressed in speech, appears paradoxical.

The weakest things in the world can overmatch the strongest things in the world.

Nothing in the world can be compared to water for its weak and yielding nature; yet in attacking the hard and the strong, nothing proves better than it. For there is no other alternative to it.

The weak can overcome the strong and the yielding can overcome the hard: This all the world knows but does not practise.

Therefore the Sage says:

He who sustains all the reproaches of the country can be master of the land;

He who sustains all the calamities of the country can be king of the world.

These are words of truth,

Though they seem paradoxical.

Recognizing Fidelity

In the social world, nothing is softer or more pliant than water.

And yet when it attacks firm, rigid things, none of them is able to win.

This is due to their lacking that with which to metamorphose it.

That the pliant wins over the rigid, the soft wins over the hard,

In the social world, no one fails to know.

[Yet] no one is able to execute.

Using this: Sages say, "Taking the soil of a state, this is called ruler of
the world's grain alters.

Taking the non-auspicious state, this is being deemed the king of the social
world."

Rectified language is like its opposite.

Water is the softest and meekest thing in the world,

Yet it is best able to overcome that which is strong and solid.

This is the truth and cannot be changed.

"The meek suppresses the solid, the soft suppresses the strong."

All the people in the world know this,

Yet they cannot apply it to their lives.

Therefore, the wise says:

"Those who can accept the blame for the entire nation

Will be the leaders of the nation.

Those who can endure the evil omens of the world

Will be the kings of the world."

Right expression is similar to its reversal.

There is nothing under Heaven softer and weaker than water,

yet to attack the hard and the strong nothing can surpass it, nothing can take its place.

That is why the soft overcomes the hard, the weak surpasses the strong.

Everyone knows this, yet no one is able to practise it.

Therefore the sage says:

He who can take upon himself the humiliation and insults inflicted on the country is called the king of a state.

He who can take upon himself the bad luck suffered by the country is called the emperor of the land under Heaven.

Straightforward words often seem contrary.

Nothing under heaven is softer and weaker than water,

Yet, in attacking the hard and strong,

Nothing can surpass it,

Because nothing can replace it.

That the soft overcome the hard,

And the weak overcome the strong -

None under heaven does not know it,

Yet none can practice it.

Hence, the sage man's saying goes:

"He who bears the state's humiliations

Is called lord of the land;

He who bears the state's calamities

Is called king of the empire."

A positive statement sounds paradoxical.

The weakest thing in the world can overcome the strongest thing in the world.

Nothing in the world can compare with the weakness of water, whose nature is limp and submissive,

But when it attacks the hardest and strongest of all, there is nothing more efficient,

Since there is no alternative to it.

The weak can overcome the strong, and the soft can conquer the tough:

The whole world knows that, but does not abide by it.

Therefore the sage says:

The person who bears all the disgrace of the country can be the master of the land,

The person who bears all the troubles of the country can be the king of the world.

These are words of truth,

Even though they sound like nothing more than a paradox.

In the world there is nothing more submissive and weak than water.

Yet for attacking that which is hard and strong nothing can surpass it.

This is because there is nothing that can take its place.

That
the weak overcomes the strong,

And the submissive overcomes the hard,

Everyone in the world knows yet no one can put this knowledge into practice.

Therefore
the sage says,

One who takes on himself the humiliation of the state

Is called a ruler worthy of offering sacrifices to the gods of earth and millet.

One who takes on himself the calamity of the state

Is called a king worthy of dominion over the entire empire.

Straightforward
words seem paradoxical.

Trust in Faith

In the world nothing is tenderer and more delicate than water. In attacking the hard and the strong nothing will surpass it. There is nothing that herein takes its place.

The weak conquer the strong, the tender conquer the rigid. In the world there is no one who does not know it, but no one will practise it.

Therefore the holy man says:

"Him who the country's sin makes his,

We hail as priest at the great sacrifice.

Him who the curse bears of the country's failing.

As king of the empire we are hailing."

True words seem paradoxical.

Water is the softest thing in the world. But in dissolving things that are hard, nothing can better it. This is because it can't be broken, thus it endures. Everybody knows the soft is stronger than the hard, and the passive overcomes the aggressive, but few put this into practice. The master is humble, therefore he is great. Because he can follow, he is able to lead. Truth is paradoxical.

In the world, nothing is softer and weaker than water, yet, in combating the strong, nothing can win over it.

There is nothing to replace it.

The weak wins over the strong; the tender wins over the steely.

No one in the world is unaware of it, yet no one follows it.

Thus, the sage says:

"One accepting a state's disgrace is worthy of being her governor;

one accepting the state's misfortunes is worthy of being the king to the world."

Rightful words appear paradoxical.

Nothing in all beneath heaven is so soft and weak as water.

And yet, for conquering the hard and strong, nothing succeeds like water.

And nothing can change it:

weak overcoming strong,

soft overcoming hard.

Everything throughout all beneath heaven knows this,

and yet nothing puts it into practice.

That's why the sage said:

Whoever assumes a nation's disgrace is called the sacred leader of a country,

and whoever assumes a nation's misfortune is called the emperor of all beneath heaven.

Words of clarity sound confused.

Nothing in the world is softer and weaker than water.

Yet there is nothing better for conquering the hard and strong, and there is no substitute for it.

That the weak overcomes the strong and

The soft overcomes the hard,

Is understood by the entire world,

But non can practice it.

So the sage says:

One who suffers disgrace for the state is qualified to be its leader.

One who caries the burden of the state's misfortune is fit to be its king.

The words of truth sound contrarian.

In
the world nothing is supple and weak in relation to water

Yet of those things which attack the firm and unyielding

Nothing is able to do better

In what is absent, this easily happens.

Being
supple conquers the unyielding

Being weak conquers the firm

In the world

Noone is without knowing it

Noone is able to practice it.

Appropriately
it happens that sages say

He who accepts the disgrace of a nation

Is appropriately called lord of the grain shrine

He who accepts the misfortune of a nation

Is appropriately acting as the king of the world.

Correct
words look like they turn back.

In this world there is nothing more supple and weak than water; and yet no one, however strong and powerful he may be, can resist its action (corrosion, wear, wave action); and no being can do without it ( for drinking, growth, etc.).

Is it clear enough that weakness is worth more than strength, that suppleness can overcome rigidity? - Everyone agrees with this; but no one acts according to it.

The Sages have said: "He who rejects neither moral filth nor political evil is capable of becoming the chief of a territory or the sovereign of the empire." (He who is supple enough to accommodate himself to all that; and not a rigid and systematic person). These words are quite true, even though they offend many.

Nothing in the world is softer or weaker than water

Yet nothing is better at overcoming the hard and strong

This is because nothing can replace it

That the weak overcomes the strong

And the soft overcomes the hard

Everybody in the world knows

But cannot put into practice

Therefore sages say:

The one who accepts the humiliation of the state

Is called its master

The one who accepts the misfortune of the state

Becomes king of the world

The truth seems like the opposite

Water appears to be the weakest and softest thing in the world. It always conforms to the shape of its container. Pour it into a bottle, it's a bottle; pour it into a cup, it's a cup. Water is the ultimate symbol of the yielding and flexible aspect of the Tao.

At the same time, there is also nothing better than water at dissolving the hardest and most unyielding rocks. We only have to look around to see how water has carved ravines and canyons out of mountains all over the world. Water is the universal solvent. Nothing can replace it.

This observation of water teaches us that despite a yielding, humble appearance, the weak overcomes the strong and the soft overcomes the hard. This is a principle that we can all understand, but somehow cannot put into practice in real life. We still have a tendency to meet force with force. When someone yells at us, we yell back louder; when someone trespasses against us, we retaliate in full measure... plus interest!

Thus, the sages teach us that those who have the strength to accept humiliation are extremely rare. Such individuals possess the power embodied in water - seemingly soft and weak, and yet able to overcome the hard and strong. If they apply this power to society, they would achieve complete mastery of leadership at the national level.

Such individuals also have the ability to accept misfortunes. Like water, they have the depth of character to contain adversities and difficulties. If they apply this ability to handle negativity at the national level, they would achieve preeminence on a global scale.

Thus, by embracing the seemingly weak and soft, one gains personal power. This is a truth that, at first glance, would appear to be contrary to our expectations!

TRUST AND FAITH

In the world nothing is more fragile than water, and yet of all the agencies that attack hard substances nothing can surpass it.

Of all things there is nothing that can take the place of Tao. By it the weak are conquerors of the strong, the pliable are conquerors of the rigid. In the world every one knows this, but none practice it.

Therefore the wise man declares: he who is guilty of the country's sin may be the priest at the altar. He who is to blame for the country's misfortunes, is often the Empire's Sovereign. True words are often paradoxical.

Nothing under heaven

Is softer (jou) and weaker (jo) than water,

Yet nothing can compare with it

In attacking the hard (chien) and strong (ch'iang).

Nothing can change (i) place with it.

That the weak overcomes the strong,

And the soft overcomes the hard,

No one under heaven does not know (chih),

Though none can put it into practice.

Therefore a sage said:

"One who receives the filth of a state,

Is called the Master of the Altar of the Soil and Grain;

One who shoulders the evils of a state,

Becomes the king under heaven."

Straightforward words (yen) appear to be their reverse.

Nothing in the world is weaker or more yielding than water; yet nothing is its equal in wearing away the hard and strong. There is nothing quite like it.

Thus, the weak can overpower the strong; the flexible can overcome the rigid. The whole world can perceive this, but does not put it into practice.

And so the truly wise say: whoever bears the shame of a nation is fit to lead the nation; whoever bears the sins of the world is fit to lead the world.

Straight words (truth) can seem crooked (paradoxial).

Water is soft and yielding, but

nothing can more effectively dissolve the hard and inflexible.

Weak defeats strong.

Soft defeats hard.

This is well–known, but not easy to put into practice.

Therefore, the Tao–Master says:

He who takes upon himself the dirt of the nation

becomes the master of its sacred soil;

he who takes upon himself the evils of the land

becomes a true king under Heaven.

Straight words seem crooked.

Seventy-eight

Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water.

Yet for attacking the solid and strong, nothing is better;

It has no equal.

The weak can overcome the strong;

The supple can overcome the stiff.

Under heaven everyone knows this,

Yet no one puts it into practice.

Therefore the sage says:

He who takes upon himself the humiliation of the people is fit to rule them.

He who takes upon himself the country's disasters deserves to be king of the
universe.

The truth often sounds paradoxical.

Nothing in the world is more supple than water,

Yet nothing is more powerful than water in attacking the hard and strong.

Why?

Because nothing can take its place.

Everyone in the world knows

That the weak is more powerful than the strong,

That the supple is more rigid than the hard,

Yet no one so far can put the knowledge into practice.

That is why the sage says,

Only he who can bear the humiliation on behalf of the state

Can be called the great priest of the state;

Only he who dare shoulder the responsibility for the calamity of the state

Can be called the king of the state.

Factual words seem ironical.

Nothing under Heaven is softer and weaker than water.

Yet in attacking what is hard and strong

Nothing can surpass water,

Because nothing can destroy it.

That the weak prevails over the strong,

That the soft prevails over the hard -

This everyone under Heaven knows,

Yet none can practice it.

Therefore the sage says:

"He who takes on himself the shame of the state

Is called lord of the land;

He who takes on himself the misfortune of the state

Is called king of all under Heaven."

True words sound contrary.

Nothing in the world is softer and more yielding than water.

Nevertheless, among all things that can overcome the hard and strong,

None is more formidable than water and none can supplant it.

Everybody knows that the soft can overcome the hard,

And the weak can subdue the strong,

But few can put these into practice.

The ancient sage once said:

"A person who can withstand all the nation's insults,

Is fit to be the ruler.

A person who can endure all the misfortunes of the nation,

Is fit to be the king of the world."

Here lies the paradox: truthful words that are candid and self-evident may appear to be "trash talk".

Trust in Faith

Ren Hsin

Nothing in the world

Surpasses water in softness and weakness;

Yet among things that attack the hard and strong,

None can do a better job than water.

Nothing can serve as its substitute.

Therefore the weak overcomes the strong;

The soft overcomes the hard.

Few in the world do not know this;

Yet nobody is able to put it into practice.

Therefore the Sage says:

He who bears the blame for the ignominy of his country

Can be called lord of the state;

He who bears the blame for the misfortune of his country

Can become king of the world.

Statements of the truth seem paradoxical.

Kapitel nicht vorhanden / chapter not available

Nothing beneath heaven

Is softer and weaker than water.

Nothing is better

To attack the hard and strong,

And nothing can take its place.

The weak overcome the strong;

The soft overcome the hard.

There is no one beneath heaven who doesn't know this,

And no one who practices it.

Therefore the sage says:

To bear the dirt of the country

Is to be master of the grain-shrines.

To bear the sins of the country

Is to be the lord of beneath-heaven.

Indeed, straight words seem crooked!

Nothing in the world is softer or more yielding than water.

But, for wearing down the hard and strong,

there is nothing like it.

That yielding overcomes the strong and softness overcomes the hard is something that is known by all,

but is practiced by few.

An ancient developed one said:

"He who can take the troubles of the people of the world is qualified to rule the world.

He who can tend to calamities for the sake of all beings is the right person to be the sovereign of the world."

Indeed, truth seems paradoxical!

LXXVIII.

True
Faith

There
is nothing weaker than water,

Or
easier to efface,

But
for attacking the hard and the strong

Nothing
can take its place.

That the
tender conquers the rigid,

That
the weak overcomes the strong,

The
whole world knows, but in practice who

Can
carry the work along?

Who
bears the sins of his country,

We
know from the sage s word,

Shall
be called the master of sacrifice,

And
hailed as its altar s lord.

Who
carries his country s woes,

The
curse of the land who bears,

Shall
be called the king of the world ; tis true,

Though
a paradox it appears.

Of the soft and weak things in the world

None is weaker than water.

Bur in overcoming that which is firm and strong

Nothing can equal it.

It is easy to know the inner meaning of this: "That which is weak conquers the strong, that which is soft conquers the hard."

All men know this, No one is able to practice it.

That is why the self-controlled man says:

"He who fears the reproach of the Kingdom is called Ruler of the Land. He who bears the woes of the Kingdom is called King of the land."

True words in paradox.

Nothing in the world

is softer and weaker

than water;

But,

for attacking

the hard and strong,

there is nothing like it!

For nothing

can take its place.

That the weak

overcomes the strong,

and the soft

overcomes the hard,

This is something

known by all,

but practiced

by none.

The Complete Thinker says:

To receive

the dirt of a country

is to be

the lord of its soil-shrines.

to hold up under

the disasters of a country

is to be

the prince of the world.

( To be strong in the face of discrace and disaster, is to be truly Noble.)

Indeed,

the Truth

sound like its opposite!

The weak conquers the strong and the soft conquers the hard.

Though every one in the world knows this, no one is able to practice it.

Therefore a Saint has said: "He who receives the filth of a state, is called the master of the Altar of the Soil and Grain; he who receives the evils of a state, is called the king of All-under-heaven."

Straightforward words seem paradoxical.

There is nothing in the world more soft and weak than water,

and yet for attacking things that are firm and strong there is nothing

that can take precedence of it;--for there is nothing (so effectual)

for which it can be changed.

Every
one in the world knows that the soft overcomes the hard, and

the weak the strong, but no one is able to carry it out in practice.

Therefore
a sage has said,

'He who accepts his state's reproach,

Is hailed therefore its altars' lord;

To him who bears men's direful woes

They all the name of King accord.'

Words
that are strictly true seem to be paradoxical.

Nothing under heaven is gentler or weaker than water,
and yet nothing
is better at cutting-through what is hard and strong,
because it is relentless.

This
defeat of the hard by the soft, the strong by the weak-
this is known to
everyone in the world,
yet nobody actually practices it.
Therefore
Sages say:
"One
who bears abuse directed against the state
is called 'Lord of the altars
of the gods of soil and grain;'
One who bears the misfortunes of the state

is called the 'King of all under Heaven.'
True
words SEEM contradictory!

Water
is so very soft

It overcomes because it yields

By wearing down the hardest rock

It shows what power weakness wields

The
weak can overcome the strong

The soft can overcome the hard

Everybody knows it's true

So hold the low in high regard

The
seer sees serenity

Where others see affliction

The seer sees the inner truth

Where others only see a fiction

NOTHING in the world is softer and weaker than water;

But, for attacking the hard and strong, there is nothing like it!

For nothing can take its place.

That the weak overcomes the strong, and the soft overcomes the hard,

This is something known by all, but practised by none.

Therefore, the Sage says:

To receive the dirt of a country is to be the lord of its soil-shrines.

To bear the calamities of a country is to be the prince of the world.

Indeed, Truth sounds like its opposite!

There is nothing more flexible and yielding than water.

And yet there is nothing better for attacking the hard and rigid, there is nothing that can do what it can do.

So it is that the rigid can be overcome by the flexible, and the haughty by the humble.

Yet even knowing this; still no one will put this into adequate practice.

For this reason it is said that the ones who accept the humiliation of the country are fit to be its rulers.

Those who take the sins of the people onto themselves are able to act as King.

This is the paradox of truth!

Water is the softest and most yielding substance.

Yet nothing is better than water,

for overcoming the hard and rigid,

because nothing can compete with it.

Everyone
knows that the soft and yielding

overcomes the rigid and hard,

but few can put this knowledge into practice.

Therefore
the Master says:

"Only he who is the lowest servant of the kingdom,

is worthy to become its ruler.

He who is willing to tackle the most unpleasant tasks,

is the best ruler in the world."

True
sayings seem contradictory.

Water is fluid, soft, and yielding. But water will wear away rock, which is rigid and cannot yield.

As a rule, whatever is fluid, soft, and yielding will overcome whatever is rigid and hard.

The wise leader knows that yielding overcomes resistances, and gentleness melts rigid defenses.

The leader does not fight the force of the group's energy, but flows and yields and absorbs and lets go. A leader must endure a great deal of abuse. If the leader were not like water, the leader would break. The ability to be soft is what makes the leader a leader.

This is another paradox: what is soft is strong.

In the whole World nothing is softer or weaker than water.

And yet even those who succeed when attacking the hard and the strong

cannot overcome it

Because nothing can harm it.

The weak overcomes the strong.

The soft conquers the hard.

No one in the World can deny this

Yet no one seems to know how to put it into practice.

Therefore the Sage says

"One who accepts a peoples" shame is qualified to rule it.

One who embraces a condemned people.

is called the king of the Universe."

True words seem paradoxical.

Nothing
in the world is more submissive and

yielding

than water.

Yet nothing can equal it in cutting the inflexible

and eroding the hard.

The
weak can subdue the strong

and the flexible outlasts the rigid.

This is common knowledge,

yet only a very few can practice it.

Therefore,
the sages say;

She who is at one with the

disgrace of a nation

is worthy to be queen.

He
who is at one with the

misfortunes of nations

is worthy to be king of kings.

The
truth frequently seems paradoxical.

Under Heaven, nothing is so soft and weak as water;

but it attacks the strong and powerful, and none can withstand it.

Nothing can change this.

Weak triumphs over Strong, Soft triumphs over Hard.

Under Heaven there is no one who does not know this,

but no one is able to practice it.

Thus does the wise man say:

bear the Country's Humiliation, to be Sovereign of the Soil and the Grain;

accept that the Country is not auspicious, to be King under Heaven.

True words seem a paradox.

Under Heaven, nothing is softer and weaker than water.

Yet nothing is better for attacking the hard and the strong.

There is no better substitute.

All under Heaven know that the weak overcomes the strong

And the soft overcomes the hard.

Yet there are none who practise this.

Therefore the Sage says:

He who takes upon himself the disgrace of the country

Is fit to be lord of the land.

He who takes upon himself the misfortunes of the country

Is fit to be king of the empire.

True words seem paradoxical.

Nothing is softer and weaker

And, at the same time, stronger, than water

While it is attacking the strong and hard in the world.

Only water can keep being the weakest steadfastly.

All the world knows the weak defeats the strong

And the soft defeats the hard,

But none can be courageous enough to do it.

Therefore, the wise person says:

"One who bears the worst disgrace

Is the glorious lord of a land;

One who suffers the worst disaster

Is the greatest savior of a nation."

The most truthful words always seem the most absurd.

Nothing in the world is Softer or Weaker than water. But when it attacks what is hard and strong none of them can win out, because they have no way of affecting it.

Softness overcomes what is hard Weakness overcomes what is unyielding. Everyone in the world understands it no one can practice it.

And so the Wise Person says: Taking on a state's dirt makes one lord of its earth altars taking on a state's misfortunes makes one King of the world. Right words seem the opposite.

Water is gentle and yielding. Yet it destroys the hard. Nothing compares to it in overcoming the hard.

Gentle and tender overcomes hard and coarse. Only wise people understand the essence of this statement...

Nothing is so flexible like the water although appears to be weak,

But in time could penetrate the hardest rock.

What
seems to be light, in time conquers the heavy,

What seems to be weak, in time conquers the strong,

Although these facts look like being known by everyone,

Few people are ready to apply them in life.

The
one who is modest is the best leader,

The one who could solve people's problems is the read leader.

There
is nothing in the world more soft and supple than water. But nothing can surpass
it for attacking the hard and rigid because there is nothing by which they can
change it. None in the world fail to know that the supple overcomes the rigid
and that the soft overcomes the hard, but none can put this knowledge into practice.
For that reason the Sage says: He who receives the dirt of the kingdom is called
the master of the shrine to Earth and Millet. He who takes up the inauspicious
affairs of the kingdom is called the king of the world. Correct sayings seem
to have things turned upside-down.

Nothing in the world is softer and weaker than water.

Yet, in attacking the hard and strong, nothing can surpass it.

Because nothing can exchange places with it,

Use weakness to overcome strength,

Use softness to overcome hardness.

None in the world do not know this.

But none can practice it.

Therefore the Sage says:

To suffer dishonor for the state

is to be the lord of the community;

To bear the calamity of the state

is to be the king of the world.

True words seem paradoxical.

Accepting the Blame

Nothing in the world,

Is as yielding and receptive as water;

Yet in attacking the firm and inflexible,

Nothing triumphs so well.

Because of what it is not,

This becomes easy.

The receptive triumphs over the inflexible;

The yielding triumphs over the rigid.

None in the world do not know this.

None have the ability to practice it.

Therefore Evolved Individuals say:

One who accepts the disgrace of the organization

Can be called the leader of the grain shrine.

One who accepts the misfortunes of the organization

Can be called the leader of the world.

Right words appear to reverse themselves.

A quiet voice of reason is louder than weapons of war.

Nothing is weaker than water,

But when it attacks something hard

Or resistant, then nothing withstands it,

And nothing will alter its way.

Everyone
knows this, that weakness prevails

Over strength and that gentleness conquers

The adamant hindrance of men, but that

Nobody demonstrates how it is so.

Because
of this the Wise Man says

That only one who bears the nations shame

Is fit to be its hallowed lord;

That only one who takes upon himself

The evils of the world may be its king.

This
is paradox.

Nothing under Heaven is softer and weaker than water,

But in attacking the hard and strong, no force can compare with it,

For nothing can take its place.

The reason why the weak can overcome the strong and the soft can overcome the heard is known to all the people under Heaven,

But none would follow and practice it.

Therefore the sage said:

He who bears humiliation of the whole state can be the sovereign of the country.

He who bears the disaster of the whole state can be the king of all under Heaven.

Positive words seem to be negative.

Of all under Heaven, nothing is more soft and pliable than water, yet for attacking the hard and stiff, nothing can beat it, so it is impossible to take its place.

That the soft conquers the stiff and the pliable conquers the hard, none among all under Heaven fails to know, yet none can practice it.

Therefore, according to what the sage says, he who sustains disgrace on behalf of the state is referred to as the master of altars dedicated to the soil and grain [its rightful ruler], and he who sustains misfortune on behalf of the state is referred to as a sovereign for all under Heaven.

These are true words that seem false.

1. In the whole world, nothing is softer and weaker than water.

2. And yet for attacking the hard and strong, nothing can bear it,

3. Because there is nothing you can use to replace it.

4. That water can defeat the unyielding—

5. That the weak can defeat the strong—

6. There is no one in the whole world who doesn't know it,

7. And yet there is no one who can put it into practice.

8. For this reason, the words of the Sage say:

9. To take on yourself the disgrace of the state—this is called being the lord
of [the altars of] earth and grain;

10. To assume responsibility for all ill-omened events in the state—this is
called being the king of the world.

11. Correct words seem to say the reverse [of what you expect them to say].

Nothing is softer

or more yielding

than water.

Yet, given time,

it can erode even the hardest stone.

That's how the weak

can defeat the strong,

and the supple

can win out over the stiff.

Everybody knows
it.

So why don't we apply it to our own lives?

Lao Tzu used
to say:

"Take on people's problems,

and you can be their leader.

Deal with the world's problems,

and you'll be a Master."

Sometimes the
truth makes no sense.

.

The Soft and Weak

Nothing in the world is softer and weaker than water.

Yet nothing is better at attacking the hard and strong.

There is no substitute for it.

The weak overcomes the strong; the soft overcomes the hard.

Everyone knows this, but no one puts it into practice.

Therefore the wise say,

"Those who bear the humiliation of the people

are able to minister to them.

Those who take upon themselves the sins of the society

are able to lead the world."

Words of truth seem paradoxical.

Nothing in the world is softer nothing more yielding than water and yet it overcomes the hard and rigid.

Nothing equals it in that.

Everybody knows:

The soft overcomes the hard the yielding, the rigid and strong.

Yet no one acts accordingly.

A Sage, however, knows and proves it:

He who takes upon himself the suffering of others is their leader.

He who saves others from trouble is the one who is saved.

Truth lies in the paradox.

Nothing Weaker Than Water

Lao Tze says,

There is nothing in the world softer and weaker than water,

and yet for attacking things that are hard and strong, there is nothing that can surpass it.

For there is nothing so effectual that can take its place.

Every one in the world knows that the soft overcomes the hard,

and the weak the strong, yet no one can put this knowledge into practice.

Therefore a sage has said,

'He who receives unto himself the calumny of the nation entitles himself to the lordship of the state;

he who bears the nation's direful woes shall be looked up to as the king of the world.'

Words that are strictly true seem to be opposed to common senses.

SINCERITY

There
is nothing more yielding than water,

yet when acting on the solid and strong,

its gentleness and fluidity

have no equal in any thing.

The
weak can overcome the strong,

and the supple overcome the hard.

Although this is known far and wide,

few put it into practice in their lives.

Although
seemingly paradoxical,

the person who takes upon himself,

the people's humiliation,

is fit to rule;

and he is fit to lead,

who takes the country's disasters upon himself.

Nothing in the world

is as soft and yielding as water.

Yet for dissolving the hard and inflexible,

nothing can surpass it.

The soft overcomes the hard;

the gentle overcomes the rigid.

Everyone knows this is true,

but few can put it into practice.

Therefore the Master remains

serene in the midst of sorrow.

Evil cannot enter his heart.

Because he has given up helping,

he is people's greatest help.

True words seem paradoxical.

Under heaven, there is nothing as soft as water, yet it can penetrate the hard;

while the strong things cannot overcome it.

Be not easy-going!

Thus, weakness overcomes strength and softness overcomes hardness.

Very few people in the world can understand and follow it.

Therefore, the Sage rulers said:

"One whose capacity can sustain blame from the whole kingdom, can be the ruler of the kingdom.

One whose capacity can bear the calamities of the world, can be the ruler of world."

Positive advice may use the opposite way.

Nothing in the world is softer and more supple than water.

When confronting strength and hardness nothing can overcome it.

Using nothing simplifies.

Using water overcomes hardness.

Using weakness overcomes strength.

There is no one in the world who does not know it, but no one can apply it.

So it is a saying of sages that:

Whoever can bear the disgrace of the country is the ruler of the country.

Whoever can bear the misfortune of the world is the ruler of the world.

Truthful speech seems paradoxical.

LXXVIII

There
is nothing softer and more yielding than water

Yet nothing hard and rigid can withstand it

Everyone knows this

That water can defeat the unyielding, that the weak can overcome the strong

Yet no one is willing to put it into practice

If
you would be a leader, you must claim every disgrace of the state

Take all the offenses of the state as your own burden

How can you be honored if you run from dishonor?

The Most Flexible Thing in the World

Nothing in the world is more flexible

and yielding than water.

Yet when it attacks the firm and the strong,

none can withstand it,

because they have no way to change it.

So the flexible overcome the adamant,

the yielding overcome the forceful.

Everyone knows this,

but no one can do it.

This is why sages say

those who can take on the disgrace of nations

are leaders of lands;

those who can take on the misfortune of nations

are rulers of the world.

True sayings seem paradoxical.

Nothing in the world is more flexible and adaptable than water.

Yet, when conquering the hard and strong, nothing is better.

This is because water does not have definite shape.

The yielding wins over the strong.

Flexibility wins over rigidity.

Everybody understands this.

But few practice it.

Therefore the sage says:

"Those, who can endure disgrace for their kingdom, can be the head of the kingdom;

Those, who can accept misfortune for their kingdom, can be Emperor of the world."

These logical words appear to be controversial.

Nothing in the world is softer and weaker than water; but, for attacking the hard and strong, there is nothing like it!

For nothing can take its place.

The weak overcomes the strong, and the soft overcomes the hard.

This is something known by all, but practiced by none.

Therefore, the sage says: To receive the blame of a country is to be the lord of its soil-shrines.

To bear the calamities of a country is to be the king of the world.

Indeed, the truth sounds like its opposite!

Nothing is more soft and yielding than water,

for cutting things hard and strong, nothing is better,

because it persists.

The weak can overcome the strong;

the supple can overcome the stiff.

Everyone knows this,

yet no one puts it into practice.

Therefore, the sage says:

who shoulders the humiliation of the people, fits to rule them,

who shoulder the country's disaster, deserves to be the king.

The truth often sounds paradoxical.

Nothing under heaven is

softer or more yielding than water.

Yet it has no equal for attacking things

that are hard and stiff.

Nothing can withstand it.

Everyone
knows that the yielding overcomes the stiff,

and the soft overcomes the hard.

Yet no one applies this knowledge.

Therefore,
an Old One said:

Only a person who has accept,ed the country's dirt

is a leader worthy to offer sacrifice

at its shrines of earth and grain.

Only a person who takes llp the country's burdens

deserves to be a leader

among those who dwell under heaven.

Straightforward
words seem crooked.

Nothing
is softer, more flexible, or more giving than

water

nothing can resist it

nothing can take it away

nothing can endure it

there is no way to hurt it.

The flexible overcomes what resists it,

the giving overcomes what takes it,

the soft overcomes the hard,

but who uses this knowledge?

Only
the person who knows the earth

as intimately as the trees and grasses

can rule the earth,

only the person who accepts

the guilt and evil of humanity

can rule the universe.

Straight
tongues seem forked.

Straight talk seems crooked.

There's hardly anything more yielding than [gas, air, and] water, but almost
none is better in attacking the resistant and hard,

There are few substitutes for it.

Thus the yielding may conquer the resistant and the soft the hard. This was
utilised by none I knew.

Wise sayings,

"Only he who has accepted the dirt of a country can be lord of its soil-shrines:
can become heaven-accepted there. Who bears evils of the country can become
a king. Who takes into himself the calumny of the world serves to preserve the
state."

Straight words seem crooked.

Nothing under heaven is softer or weaker than water,

and yet nothing is better for attacking what is hard and strong,

because of its immutability.

The defeat of the hard by the soft,

The defeat of the strong by the weak -

this is known to all under heaven, yet no one is able to practice it.

Therefore,

in the words of the sage, it is said:

"He who bears abuse directed against the state is called 'lord of the altars for the gods of soil and grain';

He who bears the misfortunes of the state is called the 'king of all under heaven.'"

True words seem contradictory.

Nothing on earth is so weak and yielding as water, but for breaking down the firm and strong it has no equal.

This admits of no alternative.

All the world knows that the soft can wear away the hard, and the weak can conquer the strong, but none can carry it out in practice.

Therefore the Sage says: He who bears the reproach of his country is really the lord of the land. He who bears the woes of the people is in truth their king.

The words of truth are always paradoxical.

As a River Makes Love to the Earth

Make love to each other

as a river makes love to the earth—

soft and yielding, yet powerful and overcoming.

Surround the rigid places with softness,

and wash them away.

Flow into the open places

with power and strength,

bringing relief from drought.

In this manner your love making will bring

joy and healing to all of life.

Sexual love is not an athletic performance.

It is the supreme form of yin and yang,

active and receptive energies,

dancing to their eternal music.

Let your love express a wide array of moods.

Let it be passionate and ecstatic.

Let it be long and leisurely.

Let it be brief and intense.

Let it be funny and playful.

Let it be romantic.

Let it be pure pleasure.

Let it be healing and comforting.

There is nothing softer and weaker than water, And yet there is
nothing better for attacking hard and strong things. For this reason
there is no substitute for it.

All the world knows that the weak overcomes the strong and the soft overcomes the hard. But none can practice it.

Therefore the sage says: He who suffers disgrace for his country Is
called the lord of the land. He who takes upon himself the country's
misfortunes Becomes the king of the empire. Straight words seem to be
their opposite.

What is more
fluid, more yielding than water?

Yet back it comes again, wearing down the rigid strength

Which cannot yield to withstand it.

So it is that the strong are overcome by the weak,

The haughty by the humble.

This we know

But never learn,

So that when wise men tell us,

'He who bites the dust

Is owner of the earth,

He who is scapegoat

Is king,'

They seem to twist the truth.

Nothing in this world is softer than water;

However, nothing in this world is more powerful than water in breaking the hardest things,

And nothing in this world can replace water.

Everyone knows this, but no one acts according to it.

So, the great men said:

"Those who can share the humiliation of the country can be the masters of the country;

Those who can share the disasters of the country can be the rulers of the country."

These truthful words sound like nonsense to present-day people.

Nothing under heaven is as soft and yielding as water.

Yet, for attacking the hard and strong,

Nothing is better and nothing is like it.

The yielding overcomes the unyielding;

the soft overcomes the hard.

Everyone under heaven knows this,

yet no one puts it into practice.

Therefore, the sage says:

He who absorbs as does water the detritus of the people

is the worthy master of the nation.

He who flows as does water with the tides of the troubled land

is the worthy king of the nation.

Truth seems often paradoxical and against common sense.

Nothing is softer and weaker

And, at the same time, stronger, than water

While it is attacking the strong and hard in the world.

Only water can keep being the weakest steadfastly.

All the world knows the weak defeats the strong

And the soft defeats the hard,

But none can be courageous enough to do it.

Therefore, the wise person says:

"One who bears the worst disgrace

Is the glorious lord of a land;

One who suffers the worst disaster

Is the greatest savior of a nation."

The most truthful words always seem the most absurd.

There is nothing more flexible and yielding than water.

And yet there is nothing better for attacking the hard and rigid, there is nothing that can do what it can do.

So it is that the rigid can be overcome by the flexible, and the haughty by the humble.

Yet even knowing this; still no one will put this into adequate practice.

For this reason it is said that the ones who accept the humiliation of the country are fit to be its rulers.

Those who take the sins of the people onto themselves are able to act as King.

This is the paradox of truth!

