===== Chapter 38 =====

High virtue is not a virtue; therefore, it exists as virtue.

Low virtue does not lose virtue; therefore, it is not [yet high] virtue.

High virtue is uncontrived

And is not done by means of [conscious] doing.

Low virtue is [also] uncontrived

But it occurs by means of [conscious] doing.

High benevolence contrives these

But is not done by means of [conscious] doing.

High righteousness [then] contrives that [i.e., high benevolence]

And it occurs by means of [conscious] doing.

High etiquette [then] contrives that [i.e., high righteousness]

And [when people] do not consider it to be a "must"

[It] then grabs [them by] the arms and casts them out.

Therefore:

Lose Tao, and afterwards comes virtue.

Lose virtue, and afterwards comes benevolence.

Lose benevolence, and afterwards comes righteousness.

Lose righteousness, and afterwards comes etiquette.

Those who [act only by] etiquette

Are the thin shell of loyalty and sincerity and the leaders of chaos.

Those who are prescient

Are flowers of the Tao but also the initiators of folly.

Therefore, great people

Live in the thick and do not dwell in the thin.

Live in the real and do not dwell in the flowers.

This is the reason they let go of those

And receive these.

High Te? No Te! That's what Te is. Low Te doesn't lack Te; That's what Te is not.

Those highest in Te take no action And don't need to act. Tose lowest in Te take action And do need to act.

Those highest in benevolence take action But don't need to act. Those
highest in righteousness take action And do need to act. Those highest
in propriety take action And if people don't reciprocate Roll up their
sleeves and throw them out.

Therefore Lose Tao And Te follows. Lose Te and benevolence follows. Lose
benevolence And righteousness follows. Lose righteousness and propriety
follows.

Propriety dilutes loyalty and sincerity: Confusion begins. Foreknowledge glorifies the Tao: Stupidity sets in.

And so the ideal person dwells In substance, not dilution, In reality, not glory, Accepts one, rejects the other.

Highest virtue does not follow virtue;

That is why it has virtue.

Lowest virtue does not stray from virtue;

That is why it lacks virtue.

Highest virtue takes no action

Yet it lacks reasons for doing so.

Lowest virtue takes action

Yet it has reasons for doing so.

Highest compassion takes action

Yet it lacks reasons for doing so.

Highest justice takes action

Yet it has reasons for doing so.

Highest ritual takes action

Yet if someone does not respond

It shows its fist to them and makes them comply.

When Tao is renounced there is virtue.

When virtue is renounced there is compassion.

When compassion is renounced there is justice.

When justice is renounced there is ritual.

Ritual is but a shadow of sincerity.

It's the beginning of confusion.

Foreknowledge is but a husk of Tao.

It's the beginning of ignorance.

Therefore those who are great

Dwell in the solid core and not in the shadow.

They dwell in the fruit, not in the husk.

It is the fruit they choose, the husk they spurn.

THE SUBSTANTIAL AND THE SUPERFICIAL

The person known to have superior Te,

Has it as a result of natural instinct.

Possessing true virtue, acting naturally - never overtly,

Has no inner need to be regarded as virtuous.

The person known to have inferior Te,

Needs to make an overt display of virtue. Being in truth without Te - acts with overt display,

So to appear virtuous to others.

The person known to have superior kindness and humanity,

Acts effortlessly, with natural instincts.

The person known to have a superior sense of strict justice and righteousness,

Needs to act with overt display of power.

The person known to favor strict adherence to rite, ritual and ceremony,

When taking action and failing to obtain a response,

Attempts to force adherence, using violence

Sequentially: If people stray from the Tao, They tend to emphasize Te.

If Te is lost, They will rely on kindness and humanity.

That being lost, Strict justice and righteousness appear.

That, being of no effect, Resort to rite, ritual and ceremony.

Rite, ritual and ceremony are the mere shell of true faith and loyalty -

The beginnings of disorder, chaos and confusion.

These human characteristics, being merely a superficial aspect of one's true essence,

Are a beginning of folly.

Thus the Sage:

Knowing what to accept and what to reject -

Dwells upon the substantial,

Not upon the superficial.

Upon the fruit, not the flower.

The person who acts from above does not have access to the action of their soul.

The action of the soul is positive.

The action of the soul emerges from below.*

The action of the soul does not abandon.

The action of the soul is positive because of its emptiness.

The action of the soul is supreme.

The action of the soul is not doing (wu wei) and uses not doing.

The action of the soul comes from below and emerges because of its actions.

Humanity acts from above and this action is the opposite of not doing.

Righteousness from above emerges because of these actions.

Then rules of behavior come from above and no one responds.

Those who act from above seize the arms of the people and apply force.

When you are separated from the Tao, you are separated from the action of your soul.

Next you abandon humanity.

When you abandon humanity, you lose your heart.

Rules of behavior follow the loss of your heart.

Truly, rules of behavior that are faithfully and loyally followed are superficial and the first sign of discord.

Know the Tao's splendor.

Folly is the place to begin to know it.

This is the reason for its greatness.

The revered master dwells in the substance and does not stay with its husk.

Stop to make it solid.

Do not inhabit that which is embellished with ornaments.

Your purpose is to discard the latter and take hold of the former.

* You must be below to receive the the gifts of others as the ocean is below the rivers to receive the gifts of the rivers.

CONCERNING THE THE

Those who possessed perfectly the powers did not manifest them,

and so they preserved them. Those who possessed them imperfectly feared

to lose them, and so lost them.

The
former did nothing, nor had need to do. The latter did, and had

need to do.

Those
who possessed benevolence exercised it, and had need it; so also

was it with them who possessed justice.

Those
who possessed the conventions displayed them; and when men would

not agree, they made ready to fight them.

Thus,
when the Tao was lost, the Magick Powers appeared; then, by

successive degradations, came Benevolence, Justice, Convention.

Now
convention is the shadow of loyalty and good will, and so the herald

of disorder. Yea, even Understanding is but a Blossom of the Tao, and

foreshadoweth Stupidity.

So
then the Tao-Man holdeth to Mass, and avoideth Motion; he is attached

to the Root, not to the flower. He leaveth the one, and cleaveth to the

other.

(Those who) possessed in highest degree the attributes (of the Tao)did not (seek) to show them, and therefore they possessed them (in fullestmeasure). (Those who) possessed in a lower degree those attributes (soughthow) not to lose them, and therefore they did not possess them (in fullestmeasure). (Those who) possessed in the highest degree those attributesdid nothing (with a purpose), and had no need to do anything. (Those who)possessed them in a lower degree were (always) doing, and had need to beso doing. (Those who) possessed the highest benevolence were (always seeking)to carry it out, and had no need to be doing so. (Those who) possessedthe highest righteousness were (always seeking) to carry it out, and hadneed to be so doing. (Those who) possessed the highest (sense of) proprietywere (always seeking) to carry it out, and had need to be so doing. (Thosewho) possessed the highest (sense of) propriety were (always seeking) toshow it, and when men did not respond to it, they bared the arm and marchedup to them. Thus it was that when the Tao was lost, its attributes appeared;when its attributes were lost, benevolence appeared; when benevolence waslost, the proprieties appeared. Now propriety is the attenuated form ofleal-heartedness and good faith, and is also the commencement of disorder;swift apprehension is (only) a flower of the Tao, and is the beginningof stupidity. Thus it is that the Great man abides by what is solid andeschews what is flimsy; dwells with the fruit and not with the flower.It is thus that he puts away the one and makes choice of the other.

[*Note: 'leal-heartedness' = loyal-heartedness.]

True virtues are not from this world,

Therefore they are true virtues

The so-called "virtues" in this world

Serve only self-interest

Therefore those are not true virtues

One who only serves the general interest, is truthfully adequate

One who is called charitable in this world,

Expects thankfulness in return

One who is called honest in this world,

Has a hidden agenda

Those who have been adapted to this world

Demand that others do the same

And if not they threaten you and get angry

Therefore, when people stray from the straight and simple road

Then they start to act virtuously, but they are not virtuous

They pretend to be honest, but they are not fair

They act decently, but they are not decent

Civilization is just a thin crust across unfaithfulness and dishonesty

It is also the source of disorder and chaos

A wise man never hides behind a mask

He trusts what's inside of him, not in appearances

Therefore he rejects appearance and embraces the essence

Intelligent control appears as uncontrol or freedom. And for that reason it is genuinely intelligent control. Unintelligent control appears as external domination. And for that reason it is really unintelligent control.

Intelligent control exerts influence without appearing to do so. Unintelligent control tries to influence by making a show of it.

The generous giver gives because he wants to give. The dutiful giver gives because he wants to receive. Whenever a regulation is imposed from above, it is not willingly obeyed. Then effort is used to enforce it.

But when Nature's spontaneous activity disappears, then intelligent action is called for. But when intelligent action is unavailable, then intuitive generosity may be appealed to. But when intuitive sympathy is lacking, principles of morality may be invoked. But where morality is ineffective, laws are enacted.

But where law is enforced, spontaneous and sincere loyalty declines, and disintegration of the harmonious society sets in. Thus valuing law as an end in itself results in minimizing fidelity to Nature itself. Knowledge of law appears at once as a flowering of Nature's way and as the source of error.

Therefore the intelligent man adheres to the genuine and discards the superficial. He keeps the fruit rather than the flower, Naturally preferring the one to the other.

The man of highest "power" does not reveal himself as a possessor of "power";

Therefore he keeps his "power".

The man of inferior "power" cannot rid it of the appearance of "power";

Therefore he is in truth without "power".

The man of highest "power" neither acts nor is there any who so regards him;

The man of inferior "power" both acts and is so regarded.

The man of highest humanity, though he acts, is not regarded;

Whereas a man of even the highest morality both acts and is so regarded;

While even he who is best versed in ritual not merely acts,

But if people fail to respond

Then he will pull up his sleeves and advance upon them.

That is why it is said:

"After Tao was lost, then came the 'power';

After the 'power' was lost, then came human kindness."

After human kindness was lost, then came morality,

After morality was lost, then came ritual.

Now ritual is the mere husk of loyalty and promise-keeping

And is indeed the first step towards brawling."

Foreknowledge may be the "flower of doctrine",

But it is the beginning of folly.

Therefore the full-grown man takes his stand upon the solid substance

And not upon the mere husk,

Upon the fruit and not upon the flower.

Truly, "he reject that and takes this".

The man of high virtue is not aware of himself

and thus attains supreme virtue.

The man of low virtue self-consciously strives

and thus is without virtue.

The wise man does nothing

yet leaves nothing undone.

The ignorant man is consumed by doing

yet little is accomplished.

The compassionate man acts without motive.

The righteous man acts to gain merit.

The moral man acts to impose order.

If no one responds,

he bares his arms and becomes an enforcer.

When Tao is lost there is virtue.

When virtue is lost there is goodness.

When goodness is lost there is morality.

When morality is lost, rules of conduct are imposed.

Rules are the remnants of trust and faith,

and the beginning of chaos.

Knowledge is an ornamental blossom of Tao

and the beginning of misunderstanding.

The sage dwells in the depths, not the surface,

in the root not the flower.

He abides in one and lets go of the other.

The highest virtue is not virtuous

This is how to hold virtue

The inferior virtue will not let go of virtue

This is why virtue is lacking

The highest virtue takes no action and has no motive to act

The inferior virtue acts on things and then has motives to act

The highest benevolence acts on things

but has no motive for action

The highest righteousness acts on things

and also has motives for action

The highest propriety acts on things

and when nobody responds to it

Then rolls up the sleeves and throws things

And so, lose the way and then comes virtue

Lose virtue and then comes benevolence

Lose benevolence and then comes righteousness

Lose righteousness and then comes propriety

Now propriety is (but) the sham of loyalty & trust

And the beginning of confusion

Being ahead in knowledge (is but) the flower of the way

And the beginning of delusion

This is why those who are most mature

Keep to the substance

(And) do not dwell on the sham

Keep to the fruitful

(And) do not dwell on the flower

And so dismiss That to choose This

Religion

The highest virtue is not virtuous;

Therefore it truly has virtue.

The lowest virtue never loses sight of its virtue;

Therefore it has no true virtue.

The highest virtue takes no action

Yet it has no reasons for acting this way.

The highest humanity takes action,

Yet it has no reasons for acting this way.

The highest righteousness takes action

And it has its reasons for acting this way;

The highest propriety takes action

And when no one responds to it,

Then it angrily rolls up its sleeves

And forces people to comply.

Therefore when Tao is lost,

Only then do we have virtue.

When virtue is lost, only then do we have humantiy.

When humanity is lost, there is righteousness.

And when righteousness is lost,

Only then do we have propriety.

As for propriety,

It is but the thin edge of loyalty and sincerity,

And the beginning of disorder.

And knowledge of the future

Is only a flowery trapping of Tao.

It is the beginning of folly.

Therefore the great man

dwells in the Thick and not in what is thin.

and not what is on the surface,

Dwells in the fruit and not in what is a flower.

Therefore accept the One and reject the other.

A truly good person doesn't dwell on her goodness. Thus she can be good. A person of false goodness never forgets her goodness. Thus her goodness is always false.

A truly good person does nothing, yet nothing remains undone. A person of false goodness is forever doing, yet everything remains forever undone.

Those who are interested in service act without motive. Those who are interested in righteousness act with motives of all sorts. Those who are interested in propriety act, and receiving no response, they roll up their sleeves and use force.

When Tao is lost, goodness appears. When goodness is lost, philanthropy appears. When philanthropy is lost, justice appears. When justice is lost, only etiquette is left.

Etiquette is the faintest husk of real loyalty and faith, and it is the beginning of confusion. Knowledge of the future is only a blossom of Tao; to become preoccupied with it is folly.

Thus the sage sets her sights on the substance and not the surface, on the fruit and not the flower. Leaving the one, she gains the other.

Great Modesty is unstudied-

It is not even conscious of being modest.

Thus, Modesty is its true nature.

But the modesty of the collective

Is self-centered in its self-effacement.

Thus, it abandons true Modesty.

Correct Modesty is unforced action,

Which lacks intent or deliberation.

Commonplace modesty is the calculated art

Of the private agenda.

Natural kindness acts for the good of the whole

Without ever being aware of it.

Perfect justice lacks a plan but meets its goals

Without passing judgment.

Conduct drawn from inner clarity

Is free, exact, and appropriate,

Without expectation.

It just rolls up its sleeves

And does its work.

When we separate from the Tao,

We resort to cultivated modesty.

Failing that, we revert to philanthropy,

And thence to self-righteousness.

And on this we erect

The mandate of propriety.

Propriety and ritual are built

On the empty shell of faith.

The superficial is thus the seed of discord,

And separates from the natural loyalty

Of inner truth.

Immature and cursory knowledge of Tao

Is the origin and the ornament of delusion.

For this reason, the Sage abides in substance,

And withdraws from appearances.

It dwells in the immanent,

And not in the manifest.

Thus, it comes not from without,

But receives you within.

Immature and cursory knowledge of Tao

Is the origin and the ornament of delusion.

For this reason, the Sage abides in substance,

And withdraws from appearances.

It dwells in the immanent,

And not in the manifest.

Thus, it comes not from without,

But receives you within.

Lao Tzu begins Part Two of the Tao Te Ching with two of his longest poems, Chapters 38 and 39. Together, they comprise an extended meditation on Te, or the Cosmic principle of Modesty. In brief, 38 talks about "Te as Te," while 39 talks about "Te as Tao." Together, they present the core of Lao Tzu's perspective on Modesty as a fundamental principle of action and understanding in following the Tao. Both poems also warn of the consequences of separation from the principle of Modesty. To this purpose, a picture is drawn of a regressive spiral of vain dogma, error, and delusion. The cultivation of false modesty as a self-conscious promotion of one's "better nature" leads to philanthropy. This leads in turn to complacency and self-righteousness on the part of those who are the purveyors of this philanthropy, and in its wake come propriety and ritual. By this point, we are so far from our true nature that we have enclosed ourselves in a garish and grotesque "ornament of delusion." We have reached the point where we "exalt superiority" (this from Chapter 39), and have opened the door wide to corruption; we have divorced mind from consciousness and thereby created a realm of "insanity and death."

Whoever has Teh never boasts of it,

and so truly possesses it.

Whoever has Teh and boasts of it,

no longer possesses it.

Possessing
Teh is to be serene;

with little effort much is done and motives diminish.

Losing Teh is to be hasty;

with great effort much is wasted and motives increase.

Possessing
Teh is to act out of love without ulterior motive;

losing Teh is to act self-righteous with an ulterior motive.

When a person of high station directs but sees no following

of that direction, he shows his hand and forces direction.

When
Tao is lost "compassion" becomes doctrine;

when compassion is lost "justice" becomes doctrine;

when justice is lost ritual becomes doctrine.

Ritual is the slow loss of loyalty,

the beginning of unprincipled confusion.

Foreknowledge
is Tao blossoming;

it is also the flower of folly.

The truly wise seek the center, not the surface;

take the fruit, leaving the flower.

Accept one and reject the other.

Superior energy is non-action, hence it is energy.

Inferior energy will not resign action; hence, it is not energy.

Superior energy is actionless because motiveless.

Inferior energy acts from motive.

Superior magnanimity is active but motiveless.

Superior equity is active from motive.

Superior propriety is active; is bares its arm and asserts itself when it meets with no response.

Thus as the Tao recedes there are energies; as the energies recede there is magnanimity; as magnanimity recedes there is equity; as equity recedes there is propriety.

Inasmuch as propriety is the attenuation of conscientiousness it is the origin of disorder.

The beginnings of consciousness are flower of Tao, but the commencement of delusion.

Therefore the men who are great live with that which is substantial, they do not abide with realities, they do not remain with what is showy. The one they discard, the other they hold.

The superior virtue is not conscious of itself as virtue; Therefore it has virtue. The inferior virtue never lets off virtue; Therefore it has no virtue.

The superior virtue seems inactive, and yet there is nothing that it does not do. The inferior virtue acts and yet in the end leaves things undone.

The superior benevolence acts without a motive. The superior righteousness acts with a motive. The superior ritual acts, but at first no one responds to it; Gradually people raise their arms and follow it.

Therefore when Tao is lost, virtue follows. When virtue is lost, benevolence follows. When benevolence is lost, righteousness follows. When righteousness is lost, ritual follows.

Ritual, therefore, is the attenuation of loyalty and faith and the outset of confusion. Fore-knowledge is the flower of Tao and the beginning of folly.

Therefore the truly great man keeps to the solid and not to the tenuous; Keeps to the fruit and not to the flower. Thus he rejects the latter and takes the former.

Consequences for Virtuosity

Superior virtuosity does not 'virtuosity.'

For that reason it has virtuosity.

Inferior virtuosity never forgets 'virtuosity'

For that reason it lacks virtuosity.

Superior virtuosity lacks deeming action

and lacks that with which to deem.

Inferior virtue deems it

and has something with which to deem.

Superior humanity deems it

and lacks that with which it deems.

Superior morality deems it

and has that with which it deems.

Superior conventionality deem it

and nothing answers.

So it raises its arm and throws it.

Hence we lose the guide and then virtuosity.

Lose virtuosity and then humanity.

Lose humanity and then morality.

Lose morality and then conventionality.

In general conventionality

is the thinning of fealty and trustworthiness

and the forerunner of disorder.

Those who realize first

take elaboration of guides

as the beginning of making them stupid.

For this reason, mature men

place emphasis on the thick

and do not dwell on the thin.

Place emphasis on the stuff

and don't dwell on the elaboration.

So they discard this and choose that.

The highest attainment (Tê) is free from attainment.

Therefore, there is attainment.

The lowest attainment is never free from attainment.

Therefore, there is no attainment.

The highest attainment never acts and is purposeless.

The lowest attainment acts and is purposeful.

The highest benevolence (jen) acts and is purposeless.

The highest righteousness (yi) acts and is purposeful.

The highest propriety (li) acts and no one follows it.

One bares one's arms and throws one's opponents away.

Therefore, when Tao is lost, we have attainment.

When attainment is lost, we have benevolence.

When benevolence is lost, we have righteousness.

When righteousness is lost, we have propriety.

Propriety is due to a lack of trustworthiness and is the beginning of disorder.

Anticipated knowledge is the superficiality of Tao and is the beginning of foolishness.

Hence, the great man chooses reality and not superficiality.

He acts according to reality and not appearance.

Thus, he grasps the one and foregoes the other.

A man of great virtue is not aware of virtue; that is the reason why he has virtue.

A man of little virtue does not miss virtue; that is the reason why he has no virtue.

The great virtue is when one does not do anything, yet everything is done.

The little virtue is when one does everything, yet something remains undone.

A man of great humanity acts, yet he acts without purpose.

A man of great justice acts, yet he acts with purpose.

A man of great courtesy acts, and if no one responds he rolls up his sleeves and tries to persuade them to respond.

That is why when the Tao is lost, virtue appears.

When virtue is lost, humanity appears.

When humanity is lost, justice appears.

When justice is lost, courtesy appears.

Courtesy is the superficial form of faith and trust; it is the beginning of disorder.

A man of much knowledge results in the flourishing of the Tao; it is the beginning of foolishness.

Therefore a true man lives with magnanimity, renounces the frivolous, lives with simplicity, renounces the luxuriant.

That is why he chooses the one and renounces the other.

The man of supreme virtue

Claimed no virtue,

Hence, he possessed virtue;

The man of the lowest virtue

Would not lose virtue,

Hence, he possessed no virtue.

The man of supreme virtue did not act,

And had no intention to act;

The man of supreme humanity acted,

But had no intention to act;

The man of supreme righteousness acted,

And had the intention to act;

The man of supreme rituals acted,

And as none responded to him,

He rolled up his sleeves to drag them along.

Hence, only when the Tao was lost

Did virtue emerge;

Only when virtue was lost

Did humanity emerge;

Only when humanity was lost

Did righteousness emerge;

Only when righteousness was lost

Did the rituals emerge.

Now, the rituals represent

The thinness of wholehearted sincerity and truthfulness

And the beginning of chaos;

Foresight represents

The flower of the Tao

And the beginning of folly.

Hence, the great man abided by its thickness,

And not its thinness;

He abided by its substance,

And not its flower.

Therefore, he abandoned that and chose this.

Superior virtue is not aware of being a superior virtue,

So it has virtue.

Inferior virtue never discards the virtue,

Therefore it has no virtue.

Superior virtue seems inactive, but it does everything.

Inferior virtue operates, but ultimately its work is incomplete.

Superior love operates without motive.

Superior justice operates without motive.

The superior system operates, even though nothing responds to it at first,

And gradually people raise their arms and join it.

Thus, when the Tao is lost, virtue is lost.

If virtue is lost, love is lost.

If love is lost, justice is lost.

If justice is lost, the superior system comes into being.

The superior system, therefore, is the expression of impatience and disloyalty, the result of confusion of the senses.

Knowledge that contains no knowledge is only the flower of Tao and the beginning of folly.

Therefore, the truly great person keeps the concrete and rejects the transient,

He keeps the fruit and does not take the flower.

Therefore he rejects the flower and takes the fruit.

A man of the highest virtue does not keep to virtue and that is why he has virtue.

A man of the lowest virtue never strays from virtue and that is why he is without
virtue.

The former never acts yet leaves nothing undone.

The latter acts but there are things left undone.

A man of the highest benevolence acts, but from no ulterior motive.

A man of the highest rectitude acts, but from ulterior motive.

A man most conversant in the rites acts, but when no one responds rolls up his
sleeves and resorts to persuasion by force.

Hence
when the way was lost there was virtue;

When virtue was lost there was benevolence;

When benevolence was lost there was rectitude;

When rectitude was lost there were the rites.

The
rites are the wearing thin of loyalty and good faith

And the beginning of disorder;

Foreknowledge is the flowery embellishment of the way

And the beginning of folly.

Hence
the man of large mind abides in the thick not in the thin, in the fruit not
in the flower.

Therefore
he discards the one and takes the other.

Discourse on Virtue

Superior virtue is unvirtue. Therefore it has virtue. Inferior virtue never loses sight of virtue. Therefore it has no virtue.

Superior virtue is non-assertion and without pretension. Inferior virtue asserts and makes pretensions.

Superior benevolence acts but makes no pretensions. Superior justice acts and makes pretensions.

Superior propriety acts and when no one responds to it, it stretches its arm and enforces its rules.

Thus one loses Reason and then virtue appears. One loses virtue and then benevolence appears. One loses benevolence and then justice appears. One loses justice and then propriety appears. The rules of propriety are the semblance of loyalty and faith, and the beginning of disorder.

Traditionalism is the flower of Reason, but of ignorance the beginning.

Therefore a great organizer abides by the solid and dwells not in the external. He abides in the fruit and dwells not in the flower.

Therefore he discards the latter and chooses the former.

The master needs no satisfaction, so his acts are always pure. An ordinary man demands satisfaction, so his acts are always tainted. The master is not a doer, so nothing is to be done. An ordinary man is a doer, so many things need doing. A man who tries to do the right thing creates more problems. A man who tries to do the moral thing will use force. If people can't act naturally, they may try to be good. If they can't be good, they may try to be moral. If they can't be moral, they may try to be fair. If they can't be fair they will conform. Conformity appears to be politeness and sincerity, but is really the realm of confusion and folly. The master dwells in the depths of reality. He considers the use of occult powers as foolishness. The miracle is the flower. The Tao is the fruit. Dwell in the fruit, for nourishment can only be found there.

By not displaying one's high virtue, one is virtuous;

By parading one's little virtue, one is not virtuous.

One with high virtue follows laissez-faire with carefree ease;

One with little virtue follows laissez-faire to parade one's virtue.

One with high nobleness practices nobleness with carefree ease;

One with high righteousness practices righteousness to parade one's righteousness.

One with high Conduct decrees;

With no followers, one uses force to twist others into following.

Thus,

virtue comes to the fore when Direction is not in evidence,

nobleness comes to the fore when virtue is not in evidence,

righteousness comes to the fore when nobleness is not in evidence,

Conduct comes to the fore when righteousness is not in evidence.

Conduct comes to the fore when loyalty and trustworthiness lack;

it brings about confusion.

Foreknowledge addresses but Direction's superficialities;

it initiates folly.

Thus,

a great man seeks fullness, not lack;

seeks substance, not facade.

He forsakes the latter [Conduct and foreknowledge] and accepts the former [loyalty, trustworthiness, and Direction].

High Integrity never has Integrity and so is indeed Integrity.

Low Integrity never loses Integrity and so is not at all Integrity.

High Integrity does nothing

and has no motives.

Low Integrity does something

and has sure motives.

High Humanity does something

and has no motives.

High Duty does something

and has sure motives.

High Ritual does something,

and when no one follows along

it rolls up its sleeves

and forces them into line.

Lose Way, and Integrity appears.

Lose Integrity, and Humanity appears.

Lose Humanity, and Duty appears.

Lose Duty, and Ritual appears.

Ritual is the thinning away of loyalty and sincerity, the beginning of chaos,

and prophecy is the flowery semblance of Way, the beginning of folly.

This is why a great elder

inhabits thick rather than thin,

fruitful substance rather than flowery semblance,

always ignores that and chooses this.

The people of high virtue show no appearance of virtue, they are thus virtuous;

The people of low virtue lose no appearance of virtue, they are thus not virtuous.

The people of high virtue take no action, but with no ulterior motive;

The people of low virtue take actions and with ulterior motive.

The people of high humanity take actions, but with no ulterior motive.

The people of high justice take actions and with ulterior motives.

The people of high propriety take actions, upon receiving no response, they extend their arms to fight.

Therefore:

When Tao is lost, one is left with virtue;

When virtue is lost, one is left with humanity;

When humanity is lost, one is left with justice;

When justice is lost, one is left with propriety.

But propriety requires only superficial loyalty and trust, and is the cause for discords and violence.

These so-called prophecies represent the superficial Tao, and is the beginning of ignorance.

Therefore a person of substance:

Prefers depth to shallowness, and

Chooses substance over appearance.

And he takes this and discards the other.

Higher
ideal lacks ideal

Appropriately presence of the ideal happens

Lower ideal lacks a loss of ideal

Appropriately absence of the ideal happens.

Higher
ideal is absent of acting yet absent of causing acting

Lower ideal is acting yet present with causing acting.

Higher
humanity is acting yet absent of causing acting

Higher morality is acting yet present with causing acting

Higher propriety is acting yet the response of noone appears

Next comes grabbing the arm yet throwing it aside.

So
lose tao yet back ideal

Lose ideal yet back humanity

Lose humanity yet back morality

Lose morality yet back propriety.

In
the end those with propriety

Have loyal belief without warmth yet the leader of being
confused

Those with knowledge of what comes next

The flower of Tao yet the origin of being fooled.

Appropriately
it happens that the great husband

Dwells in what is spread thickly, not residing in what lacks
warmth

Dwells in the fruit, not residing in the flower.

So
detach from that, grab this.

That which is superior to the Virtue of the Principle (the Principle itself, considered in its essence), does not act, but holds Virtue in a state of immanence within itself. All those which are inferior to the Virtue of the Principle (artificial rules of conduct), are only a palliative for the loss of that Virtue; palliative with which it has nothing in common.

That which is superior to the Virtue (the Principle), does not act in detail. (The artificial rules) which are inferior to the Virtue (of the Principle) only exist for action in detail.

When nature, with its good instincts, has been forgotten, artificial principles come as palliatives for this deficit. These are, in descending order, goodness, fairness, rites and laws. (Artificial Confucian goodness is superior to artificial fairness which, in struggling to cope with the diverse inclinations of men, has produced rites and laws).

Rites are but a poor expedient to cover up the loss of original uprightness and frankness. They are more a source of trouble (in etiquette and rubric) then they are of order. The last term of this descending evolution, political wisdom (making laws), was the beginning of all abuses.

He who is truly a man, holds himself to uprightness and natural good sense. He is contemptuous of artificial principles. Using discernment, he rejects this (the false), in order to embrace that (the true).

High virtue is not virtuous

Therefore it has virtue

Low virtue never loses virtue

Therefore it has no virtue

High virtue takes no contrived action

And acts without agenda

Low virtue takes contrived action

And acts with agenda

High benevolence takes contrived action

And acts without agenda

High righteousness takes contrived action

And acts with agenda

High etiquette takes contrived action

And upon encountering no response

Uses arms to pull others

Therefore, the Tao is lost, and then virtue

Virtue is lost, and then benevolence

Benevolence is lost, and then righteousness

Righteousness is lost, and then etiquette

Those who have etiquette

Are a thin shell of loyalty and sincerity

And the beginning of chaos

Those with foreknowledge

Are the flowers of the Tao

And the beginning of ignorance

Therefore the great person:

Abides in substance, and does not dwell on the thin shell

Abides in the real, and does not dwell on the flower

Thus they discard that and take this

Those who possess the higher form of virtue are not intentionally virtuous. Their actions are natural and unforced. This is why we say they have true virtue.

There are also those who possess a lower kind of virtue. They never lose sight of virtue because they have to constantly remind themselves to be virtuous. This is why we say they have no true virtue.

Those who possess the higher form of virtue do not act with contrivance. Their actions are without ulterior movies. They act out of virtue because it is natural, not because they want to "look good" doing it.

Those with the lower form of virtue are the opposite. When they act in ways that seem virtuous, they do so for a specific personal agenda - perhaps improving their image, assuaging guilty feelings, etc.

Those who possess a higher form of benevolence are a bit different. They contrive to act in benevolent ways, but because they do so out of love and compassion for others, their actions are free of personal agenda.

Those who possess the higher form righteousness are similar to those who possess the lower form of virtue in that they also take contrived actions. They do so out of a powerful sense of self-righteousness, and because they feel so strongly justified in themselves, their actions always reflect their own motives.

Those who posses the higher form of etiquette are yet another step down. They act with contrived politeness and propriety. They fall back on protocol and rules to mask their true intentions, and if they fail to elicit from others the response they are looking for, they will use physical means to force their views upon others aggressively.

From these observations, the sages conclude that when people lose the naturalness of the Tao, they resort to virtue. Virtuous practices allow people to approximate the goodness that flow naturally from the Tao.

If people lose their virtues, then the next best thing would be benevolence. If people can still hold on to the mindset of love, compassion and kindness, then they can at least treat one another in a way that is gentle and humane.

What if people lose their benevolence too? Then they will have no choice but to resort to righteousness. Their actions can no longer be guided by love, compassion and kindness. Instead, they will act, choose and decide based on correctness or a sense of justice. Everything becomes more muddled because right and wrong can often be so subjective.

Finally, what if people can no longer rely on righteousness? Then etiquette is all that's left. Following etiquette, customs and propriety may or may not be right, benevolent, or virtuous... but at least there is something to follow.

This sort of etiquette is artificial and disingenuous. Those who practice it are little more than thin shells without substance, pretending to be loyal and sincere while possessing neither quality. Such people are the source of chaos, discord and strife.

In a similar way, people who possess knowledge without righteousness, benevolence or virtue are also thin shells lacking substance. Like flowers, they give a pleasing appearance but possess none of the satisfying goodness of fruits. That's what we mean when we call them the flowers of the Tao. Such people may project a knowledgeable appearance, but are in fact ignorant in basic, fundamental ways.

To summarize, the truly great person would be the antithesis of the above. That is, they focus on substance instead of the thin veneer of superficiality. Their emphasis is on the real inner self, and not on the facade of external appearance. They discard the fakery of etiquette and knowledge, and reach for benevolence, justice, virtues... and finally the Tao.

A DISCUSSION ABOUT TEH

Essential teh makes no show of virtue, and therefore it is really virtuous. Inferior virtue never loses sight of itself and therefore it is no longer virtue. Essential virtue is characterized by lack of self-assertion (wu wei) and therefore is unpretentious. Inferior virtue is acting a part and thereby is only pretense.

Superior benevolence in a way is acting but does not thereby become pretentious. Excessive righteousness is acting and does thereby become pretentious. Excessive propriety is acting, but where no one responds to it, it stretches its arm and enforces obedience.

Therefore when one loses Tao there is still teh; one may lose teh and benevolence remains; one may forsake benevolence and still hold to righteousness; one may lose righteousness and propriety remains.

Propriety, alone, reduces loyalty and good faith to a shadow, and it is the beginning of disorder. Tradition is the mere flower of the Tao and had its origin in ignorance.

Therefore the great man of affairs conforms to the spirit and not to external appearance. He goes on to fruitage and does not rest in the show of blossom. He avoids mere propriety and practices true benevolence.

A person of high te is not te,

Therefore such a person has te;

A person of low te does not lose (shih) te,

Therefore such a person has no te.

A person of high te does not act (wei),

For such a person has no cause for action;

A person of low te acts,

For such a person has cause for action.

A person of high jen (humanity) acts,

Yet such a person has no cause for action;

A person of high i (righteousness) acts,

For such a person has cause for action.

A person of high li (propriety) acts,

Yet finding no response,

Proceeds to bare the arms and throw a rope.

Therefore when Tao is lost (shih), then there is te.

When te is lost, then there is jen (humanity).

When jen is lost, then there is i (righteousness).

When i is lost, then there is li (propriety).

As to li, it is the thin edge of loyalty and faithfullness,

And the beginning of disorder;

As to foreknowledge (ch'ien shih), it is the flowering of Tao,

And the beginning of stupidity (yü).

Thus a great person, abiding in the thick,

Does not dwell in the thin;

Abiding in the kernel,

Does not dwell in the flower.

Therefore such a person leaves that and takes this.

Whoever has Teh never boasts of it and so truly possesses it. Whoever has Teh and boasts of it no longer possesses it. Possessing Teh is to be serene; with little effort much is done and motives diminish. Losing Teh is to be hasty; with great effort much is wasted and motives increase.

Possessing Teh is to act out of love without ulterior motive; losing Teh is to act self?righteous with an ulterior motive.

Whe a person of high station directs but sees no following of that direction, he shows his hand and forces direction.

When Tao is lost "compassion" becomes doctrine; when compassion is lost "justice" becomes doctrine; when justice is lost ritual becomes doctrine; ritual is the slow loss of loyalty, the beginning of unprincipled confusion.

Foreknowledge is Tao blossoming; it is also the flower of folly. The truly wise seek the center, not the surface; take the fruit, leaving the flower. Accept one and reject the other.

The Tao–Master does not cling to power

and is therefore truly powerful.

The lesser man clings to power and thus has none.

The truly powerful man does nothing [i.e., he practices non–ado (wu–wei)]

and thus leaves nothing undone.

The lesser man is awhirl with activity

and thus gets nothing accomplished.

The virtuous man does what is good as an end in itself.

The moral man has a need to do what is good.

The man of propriety (li) makes doing good into a ritual,

and if people do not follow him willingly,

he forces them into line.

Thus, when the Tao is lost, virtue arises.

When virtue is lost, morality arises.

When morality is lost, justice arises.

When justice is lost, propriety arises.

Propriety is merely a shadow of justice, morality, and virtue;

it is the beginning of chaos . . . .

Therefore, the Tao–Master stays with the Tao.

He does not live on the surface of things.

He looks to the fruit, not to the flower.

He accepts this [Tao] and rejects that [non–Tao].

Thirty-eight

A truly good man is not aware of his goodness,

And is therefore good.

A foolish man tries to be good,

And is therefore not good.

A truly good man does nothing,

Yet leaves nothing undone.

A foolish man is always doing,

Yet much remains to be done.

When
a truly kind man does something, he leaves nothing undone.

When a just man does something, he leaves a great deal to be done.

When a disciplinarian does something and no one responds,

He rolls up his sleeves in an attempt to enforce order.

Therefore
when Tao is lost, there is goodness.

When goodness is lost, there is kindness.

When kindness is lost, there is justice.

When justice is lost, there ritual.

Now ritual is the husk of faith and loyalty, the beginning of confusion.

Knowledge of the future is only a flowery trapping of Tao.

It is the beginning of folly.

Therefore
the truly great man dwells on what is real and not what is on the surface,

On the fruit and not the flower.

Therefore accept the one and reject the other.

A man of the great virtue (Teh) does not claim to be of virtue,

Thus he is of the true virtue.

A man of the small virtue always holds fast to the virtue in form,

Thus he is actually of no virtue.

A man of the great virtue remains inactive,

Without deliberately manifesting his virtue;

A man of the small benevolence keeps being active,

Always deliberately manifesting his virtue.

A man of the great benevolence acts but never deliberately shows his benevolence;

A man of great justice acts and also deliberately shows his justice;

A man of rigid rites acts and even rolls up his sleeves to force people to conform to rites when no one responds to him.

Therefore

Virtue comes after the loss of Tao;

Benevolence comes after the loss of virtue;

Justice comes after the loss of benevolence;

Rites come after the loss of justice.

Thus rites result from the lack of loyalty and good faith,

And function as the beginning of the great disorder.

Foresight is only the flowery embellishment of the Tao

As well as the beginning of ignorance.

Hence the true man sets store by the thick rather than by the thin,

And values the fruit rather than the flower.

That is why he takes the former and discards the latter.

The man of superior virtue [te] is not virtuous;

Therefore he has virtue.

The man of inferior virtue never fails to be virtuous;

Therefore he has no virtue.

A man of superior virtue never acts;

He seeks nothing through action.

A man of inferior virtue acts;

He seeks [virtue] through action.

A man of superior humaneness [jen] acts;

Yet he seeks nothing through action.

A man of superior righteousness [i] acts;

He seeks [righteousness] through action.

A man of superior ritual propriety [li] acts;

And when others fail to respond accordingly,

He stretches his arm and charges at them.

Therefore, when Tao is lost, virtue appears;

When virtue is lost, humaneness appears;

When humaneness is lost, righteousness appears;

When righteousness is lost, ritual propriety appears.

Truly, ritual propriety means

The thinning of loyalty and truthfulness,

And the origin of disorder.

Foresight

Is the flower of Tao,

The beginning of folly.

Therefore the great man

Dwells in the thick,

Not in the thin,

In the fruit,

Not in the flower.

Therefore he discards that and takes this.

The ruler with great virtue never reveals his virtue.

Hence, he truly possesses real virtue.

An ordinary ruler deliberately tries to show off his virtue.

He therefore does not possess any real virtue.

The ruler with great virtue goes with the flow.

His action encapsulates the essence of wu-wei.

The ordinary ruler deliberately tries to go with the flow.

He thus achieves the antithesis of wu-wei.

The ruler with great compassion rules benevolently without ulterior motives.

He thus captures the essence of wu-wei.

The ruler of righteousness deliberately sets out to rule benevolently.

He thus misses the essence of wu-wei.

The ruler of propriety (rites) imposes rules and regulations.

When the people do not conform, he responds with punitive measures.

Therefore, when Dao is in decline, virtue supplants it.

When virtue is in decline, benevolence replaces it.

When benevolence fails, righteousness takes its place.

When righteousness does not prevail, rites begin to exert their authority.

The prevalence of rites is the sign that loyalty and trust are wearing very thin and that serious trouble is brewing.

Clever people with prescience to foretell events represent the superficiality of Dao.

This heralds the beginning of ignorance.

Therefore, a man of substance is unsophisticated but not shallow.

He resides on the fundamental but not on the superficial.

He thus embraces the substance and rejects the trimmings.

Discourse on Virtue

Lun Teh

Superior virtue is not virtue-conscious,

Therefore it has virtue.

Inferior virtue never forgets virtue,

Therefore it has no virtue.

Superior virtue does not interfere,

And has no motive to interfere.

Inferior virtue interferes,

And has a motive to interfere.

Superior benevolence interferes without motive;

Superior righteousness interferes from motive;

Superior propriety interferes,

And failing to evoke any response,

Lifts its arm and resorts to violence.

Therefore,

After the loss of Tao, virtue appears;

After the loss of virtue, benevolence appears;

After the loss of benevolence, righteousness appears;

After the loss of righteousness, propriety appears.

Propriety is a mere veneer of loyalty and sincerity,

And constitutes the prime cause of confusion.

Traditional knowledge is the flower (outward show) of Tao,

And has become the origin of folly.

Therefore, men of the heroic type abide by depth,

And stay away from shallowness;

Abide by the fruit and stay away from the flower.

Forsooth, they reject this and adopt that.

The highest power is not aware of itself as a power;

Hence its power.

The inferior power clings to the appearance of power:

Hence its lack of power.

The highest power works by non-action and has no ulterior aims.

The inferior power acts and claims recognition.

The highest loving-kindness acts without motive.

The highest justice acts with motive.

The highest ritual of convention and respectability acts, and if there is no response, force is used to compel respect.

Therefore: Whan the Tao is lost, power appears;

When power is lost, loving-kindness appears;

When loving-kindness is lost, justice appears;

When justice is lost, ritual appears.

Ritual is but the sahdow of faith and loyalty, and the beginning of confusion.

Prediction of what is to come is doubtless an offshoot of the Tao, but the beginning of ignorant folly.

Therefore, he who is truly great holds to the substance and not to the shadow;

He holds to the main stem and not to the offshoot.

Thus he disregards That and nurtures This.

High virtue is not virtuous;

Therefore it has virtue.

Low virtue is always virtuous;

Therefore it has no virtue.

High virtue does nothing

And has no ulterior ends.

Low virtue does something,

Also has ulterior ends.

High ceremony does something,

And when it gets no response

It rolls up its sleeves and takes to force.

When Tao is lost, there is virtue.

When virtue is lost, there is humaneness.

When humaneness is lost, there is morality.

When morality is lost there is ceremony.

Now ceremony is the shell

Of loyalty and trust

And the beginning of befuddlement.

As to foreknowledge,

It is a blossomy path

And the beginning of folly.

Therefore,

The fulfilled man holds to

The solid rather than the shell,

The fruit rather than the blossom.

He avoids the outward, accepts the inward.

One of subtle universal virtue is not conscious of being virtuous,

therefore, he is truly virtuous.

One of partial virtue attempts to live up to an external standard of virtue,

therefore, he is not truly virtuous.

One of whole virtue does not need to do anything in order to be virtuous,

because virtue is the very essence of one's true nature.

But, one of partial virtue believes that something must be done in order to prove that he is virtuous.

Thus, partial virtue becomes prevalent when people fail to follow their own true nature.

Benevolence becomes prevalent when people fail to be naturally kind.

Etiquette becomes prevalent when people fail to be righteous and considerate.

When people find no response with etiquette,

they roll up their sleeves and force others to respond to them.

When people stray from the subtle way of universal nature,

they can no longer perceive their own true nature.

Thus, they emphasize relative virtue.

When natural virtue is lost,

society depends on the doctrine of humanism.

When humanity becomes corrupted,

social and religious teachings appear and become powerful forces.

When social and religious teachings become corrupted,

what is left behind is the empty shell of superficial ceremonies and artificial etiquette.

When etiquette is emphasized,

it is because people lack the simple qualities of fairness and kindness.

This is the starting point of people of confusion.

All of these man-made, partial virtues are merely superficial flowers, a false nature.

When people begin to move away from their own true nature,

it is the beginning of hypocrisy.

Therefore, one who integrates his own individual being with the deep nature of the universe sets his heart upon the root of reality rather than the husk, and upon the nourishment of the fruit rather than the fleeting beauty of the flowers.

Truly, he cherishes what is deep within rather than what is shallow without.

Knowing this, he knows what to accept and what to reject.

XXXVIII.

A
Discourse on the Virtues

The
highest virtue is un-virtue, therefore it has virtue,

Inferior
virtue virtue loses not, and so has none,

The highest
virtue is non-action, and thereby does nothing,

Inferior
virtue acts it, and exists by acting done.

The
highest benevolence acts it, but thereby does nothing,

The
highest righteousness acts it, and acting has thereby,

The
highest propriety acts it, and then, when none respond,

It
stretches forth its arm, and enforces its reply.

So,
when the Tao is lost to sight, its attributes are shown,

When
these are lost to sight, we find Benevolence appear,

When
Benevolence is lost to sight, then Righteousness comes on,

And
when Self-righteousness is lost, Propriety is here.

Now,
these propriety-things are shams of loyalty and faith,

Forerunners
of disorder, which soon will come to be,

Quick-wittedness
is but the flimsy flower of the Tao,

And
is the first beginning of man s incapacity.

With
the solid dwells the solid man, not with the empty shell,

With
the mature fruit he abides, but with the flower not he,

The
latter he avoids, that the former his may be.

To assume virtue without being really virtuous is to be virtuous from duty;

To be less virtuous, yet not to lose real virtue, is to be virtuous from Inner Life.

Supreme virtue comes through activity of Inner Life; then let us actively seek Inner Life.

TO be less virtuous and to practice it, let us be active in the performance of duty.

To assume benevolence and practice it let us actively seek Inner Life.

To assume right conduct and practice it let us be active in the performance of duty.

To assume expediency and practice it is to find that no one honours it; then it bares the arm, and asserts itself by force.

Therefore, when Tao is lost, follow Virtue; when virtue is lost, follow benevolence; when benevolence is lost, follow right conduct; when right conduct is lost, follow expediency.

Those who are Masters of expediency have in the heart only the shadow of faith; and in the mind only confusion.

Those who are Leaders of politeness have only the husk of Tao, which is the source of ignorance.

That is why the greatest of the Masters abide in the real,

They do not abide in the shadow.

They hold to the fruit, they do not hold to the husk.

Therefore they put away the latter and take hold of the former.

High Virtue (Power) is completely virtuous (powerful) without chasing after

virtue (power);

Therefore it has Virtue (Power).

Low Virtue (Power) is always chasing after virtue (power)

and never frees itself from the chase;

Therefore it is without Virtue (Power).

High Virtue (Power) is without problems and is without private goals to

serve:

Low Virtue (Power) not only makes problems but has private goals to serve.

High humanity makes problems but is without private goals to serve:

High morality not only makes problems but has private goals to serve.

High ceremony makes problems but is without response;

Then it raises its arms to show itself.

Losing Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ), man uses Virtue (Power).

Losing Virtue (Power), humans use humanity.

Losing humanity, people use morality.

Losing morality, humans use ceremony.

Ceremony is the shell of faith and loyalty;

It is the beginning of all,

not understanding and mix-up.

Knowing the future, is only, the

attractive without substance part, of the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

And the beginning of foolishness.

The full-grown human

Can enter the substance

rather than the shell;

Can enter totality

rather than the promise.

They prefer what is within

instead of appearance.

Superior Virtue never asserts its virtue; therefore it has virtue.

Inferior virtue never abandons it virtue; therefore it has no virtue.

Superior Virtue neither acts nor aims.

Inferior Virtue acts and aims

Superior humanity acts but aims not.

Superior justice acts and aims.

(A man of) superior ritual conduct acts, and not finding response, he pulls up his sleeves and becomes aggressive.

Thus, once the Way is abandoned, thereafter Virtue is asserted; once Virtue is abandoned, thereafter humanity is asserted; once humanity is abandoned, thereafter justice is asserted; once justice is abandoned, thereafter ritual conduct is asserted.

Now ritual conduct is the thin shell of loyalty and good faith and the beginning of disorder. Foreknowledge is but a blossom of the Way and the beginning of folly.

Therefore, "the Great Adult" is concerned with what is think, and keeps not to what is thin; he is concerned with the kernel and keeps not to the blossom.

Therefore he rejects that and chooses this.

(Those who) possessed in highest degree the attributes (of the

Tao) did not (seek) to show them, and therefore they possessed them

(in fullest measure). (Those who) possessed in a lower degree those

attributes (sought how) not to lose them, and therefore they did not

possess them (in fullest measure).

(Those
who) possessed in the highest degree those attributes did

nothing (with a purpose), and had no need to do anything. (Those who)

possessed them in a lower degree were (always) doing, and had need to

be so doing.

(Those
who) possessed the highest benevolence were (always seeking)

to carry it out, and had no need to be doing so. (Those who)

possessed the highest righteousness were (always seeking) to carry it

out, and had need to be so doing.

(Those
who) possessed the highest (sense of) propriety were (always

seeking) to show it, and when men did not respond to it, they bared

the arm and marched up to them.

Thus
it was that when the Tao was lost, its attributes appeared;

when its attributes were lost, benevolence appeared; when benevolence

was lost, righteousness appeared; and when righteousness was lost, the

proprieties appeared.

Now
propriety is the attenuated form of leal-heartedness and good

faith, and is also the commencement of disorder; swift apprehension is

(only) a flower of the Tao, and is the beginning of stupidity.

Thus
it is that the Great man abides by what is solid, and eschews

what is flimsy; dwells with the fruit and not with the flower. It is

thus that he puts away the one and makes choice of the other.

A 'Virtuoso' does not claim virtuosity..
and therefore, has it.

An aspiring 'virtuoso' can think of nothing else!..
and therefore, is not
there, quite yet.
A
true Virtuoso Does Nothing Much Personal..
for they have no egoic motives
toward their skill.
A true Humanitarian takes action..
but not for any
egoic reasons.
A truly 'Righteous' person takes action
only for 'good
causes.'
A
'Civilized' person takes action,
but if others do not respond accordingly,

they roll up their sleeves and convince them!
Therefore,
when DEI is lost, afterwards comes 'Virtuosity' rediscovered;
When Virtuosity
has not yet been rediscovered, there comes 'Humanitarianism;'
when Humanitarianism
has been lost, afterwards comes 'Righteousness;'
when Righteousness has been
lost there comes 'Civilization' in it's place.
Now,
Civilization is the refined product of Trust..
the Karma of Trust is the
chaos of trusting the untrustworthy.
Foreknowledge is but the blossoming
of DEI,
and not it's final 'proof.'
Therefore,
a person like DEI resides in original Wholeness,
not in 'refined products.'

They reside in fruitful 'proof,'
not it's first blossoming promise.

They
'suspect' the one and adopt the other.

You
needn't search for power

You already have it all

To seek outside your empty core

Is looking for a fall

The
seer doesn't do a thing

But sees that all is finished

Foolish people run about

And leave totality diminished

Goodness
must be doing

And justice never is complete

Propriety can't satisfy

Obedience is forced defeat

When
totality is lost

Goodness comes to take its place

Followed by propriety

Bewilderment and end of grace

The
seer sees periphery

But also sees the open core

And thus the seer sees the whole

And dwells therein forevermore

HIGH Virtue is non-virtuous;

Therefore it has Virtue.

Low Virtue never frees itself from virtuousness;

Therefore it has no Virtue.

High Virtue makes no fuss and has no private ends to serve:

Low Virtue not only fusses but has private ends to serve.

High humanity fusses but has no private ends to serve:

High morality not only fusses but has private ends to serve.

High ceremony fusses but finds no response;

Then it tries to enforce itself with rolled-up sleeves.

Failing Tao, man resorts to Virtue.

Failing Virtue, man resorts to humanity.

Failing humanity, man resorts to morality.

Failing morality, man resorts to ceremony.

Now, ceremony is the merest husk of faith and loyalty;

It is the beginning of all confusion and disorder.

As to foreknowledge, it is only the flower of Tao,

And the beginning of folly.

Therefore, the full-grown man sets his heart upon the substance rather than the husk;

Upon the fruit rather than the flower.

Truly, he prefers what is within to what is without.

True virtue is itself virtuous, and does not need to try to appear virtuous.

The common man may try to show the semblance of virtue, but this showing is in itself a revealing of the lack of virtue.

Those of high virtue never accomplish any act out of need for show, or ulterior motive.

The 'seemingly virtuous' will make a big show of the virtuous acts they perform.

A virtuous person will act according to what is right regardless of the situation at all times.

A common person will act according to the results he expects from the action, if the results are not to his benefit he will not do them.

A low person will act and expect response from others, if he does not secure his riches he will use force to extract it.

When the Tao is lost in a person or land one must resort to righteousness to rule society.

When righteousness is lost one has to use morality.

When morality has been abandoned there is only ritual to conduct society.

But ritual is only the outer clothing of true belief; this is nearing chaos.

The highest good is not to seek to do good,

but to allow yourself to become it.

The ordinary person seeks to do good things,

and finds that they can not do them continually.

The
Master does not force virtue on others,

thus she is able to accomplish her task.

The ordinary person who uses force,

will find that they accomplish nothing.

The
kind person acts from the heart,

and accomplishes a multitude of things.

The righteous person acts out of pity,

yet leaves many things undone.

The moral person will act out of duty,

and when no one will respond

will roll up his sleeves and uses force.

When
the Tao is forgotten, there is righteousness.

When righteousness is forgotten, there is morality.

When morality is forgotten, there is the law.

The law is the husk of faith,

and trust is the beginning of chaos.

Our
basic understandings are not from the Tao

because they come from the depths of our misunderstanding.

The master abides in the fruit and not in the husk.

She dwells in the Tao,

and not with the things that hide it.

This is how she increases in wisdom.

Potent leadership is a matter of being aware of what is happening in the group and acting accordingly. Specific actions are less important than the leader's clarity or consciousness. That is why there are no exercises or formulas to ensure successful leadership.

Potency cannot be calculated or manipulated, nor is it a matter of trying to look good.

Three examples illustrate differing degrees of potency in leadership:

- Potent: a conscious yet spontaneous response to what is happening in the here-and-now; no calculation or manipulation.

- Less Potent: trying to do what is right. This is calculated behaviour base don the concept of right, and manipulative behaviour based on an idea of what should happen.

- Least Potent: imposed morality. Imposed morality rests entirely on should and shouldn't. It is both calculated and manipulative, and meets resistance with punishment. It sheds no light on what is actually happening. It often backfires.

Leaders who lose touch with what is happening cannot act spontaneously, so when they try to do what they think is right. If that fails, they often try coercion.

But the wise leader who loses the sense of immediacy becomes quiet and lets all effort go until a sense of clarity and consciousness returns.

A truly good person does not try to be good,

Therefore is he able to be good.

Another person tries to be good,

And finds that he cannot.

A good person does not act, nor has any reason to.

Another person is always doing

Because he thinks he has to.

A humanitarian acts from the heart.

A politician acts, but he has ulterior motives.

When a legalist acts and gets no response,

He rolls up his sleeves and uses force.

Therefore, when the Tao is lost, Remember that there is stil goodness.

When goodness is lost, there is stil kindness.

When kindness is lost, there is stil the law.

When the law is lost, there is stil politeness.

Politeness is the thin edge of loyalty and trust,

And is the beginning of chaos. We need those who try to direct society

About as much as the Tao needs a flower

To make it attractive.

They mark the beginnings of stupidity.

The Sage concerns herself with causes,

Not symptoms

And focuses on the Tao, not the silly flower.

Forget the flower, follow the Tao instead.

A
good person is not focused on her goodness

because she is centered in oneness.

A confused person is focused on goodness

and consequently has difficulty obtaining it.

A
person centered in oneness

flows with life and appears to do nothing;

yet because she is in harmony

with the oneness of Infinity

she leaves nothing undone.

A
confused person is focused on achievements

and consequently never truly achieves

anything.

A
caring person is caring all the time

and therefore leaves nothing unnurtured.

When the righteous person does something,

he leaves things in turmoil.

When a person of great discipline does something

and others do not follow,

he attempts to force them to conform to his

perception of reality.

When
the oneness of humanity is forgotten,

a distinction is made between good and evil.

Focusing on goodness leads one down the

path of self-righteousness which

separates a person from others.

Self-righteousness leads to justice

and since justice is as arbitrary as

goodness

and righteousness, it degenerates into

a facade of justice or ritual.

Ritual is the backbone of religion

and religion is the harbinger of

judgment

and judgment is the backbone of

conflict.

Therefore, a centered person dwells upon the

oneness of Infinity and not on

distinguishing which leads to confusion;

on the plant and not on the flower.

A
centered person embraces oneness

and rejects distinctions.

High Virtue is not Virtuous, and therefore has virtue.

Low Virtue is Virtuous, and thus lacks virtue.

High Virtue does not act, and governs by inaction.

Low Virtue acts, and governs by action.

Great Charity acts, but governs by inaction.

Great Justice acts, and governs by action.

Great Ritual takes action and gets no response,

then grabs you by the arm and expels you.

So, we lose the Way and turn to Virtue,

lack Virtue and look for Charity,

receive no Charity and seek Justice,

get no Justice and turn to Ritual.

Alas, Ritual is the shadow of true faith, and a source of confusion.

Divination is the flower of Tao, but the beginning of foolishness.

There do the Elders place their confidence, not with Ritual,

with the practical, not the imagined.

Therefore reject the latter, embrace the former.

The truly good man is unaware of his goodness,

And thus is good.

The foolish man sets himself to be good,

And so is not good.

The truly good man takes no action,

Yet all things are accomplished.

The foolish man is forever taking action,

And much is left undone.

The truly benevolent man acts without striving to satisfy personal ends;

Yet the seeker of morality acts with an ulterior motive.

And when the follower of rules takes action and no one responds,

He rolls up his shirt-sleeves to impose order by force.

Therefore, when Tao is lost, goodness remains.

When goodness is lost, benevolence remains.

When benevolence is lost, morality remains.

When morality is lost, rules remain.

Merely following rules1 is a pretence of trust and loyalty, and is the beginning of confusion.

To seek knowledge of the future is to hold to a false Tao, and is the beginning of folly.

Therefore the superior man holds to the real

And ignores mere appearances;

Takes the fruit and rejects the flower;

Accepts the first and discards the second.

1. i.e. adhering to Confucian Rites.

The virtuous getter does not get,

And is therefore getting something better.

The worst getter does not give what he/she gets

And is therefore getting something worse.

The best getter does nothing for nothing.

The kind giver does something for nothing.

The faithful contractor does something for something.

The ceremony holder does things but is not responded to,

For ceremony means lack of faithfulness

And the start of social disorders.

Predictive knowledge is the turbulence of the Way

And the beginning of folly.

Therefore, the reasonable person

Will stay in the thick center of the Way

Instead of its tumbling thin edge,

And will prefer the solid spot of the Way

Instead of its turbulence.

The finest Te is not Te-like, so it is Te the poorest Te never leaves off being Te-like, so it is not Te.

The finest Te: no working at it, no goal in mind the poorest Te: people work at it, with a goal in mind.

The finest Goodness: People work at it, but with no goal in mind the finest Morality': People work at it, with a goal in mind the finest Etiquette: People work at it, and, when none pay attention, they roll up their sleeves and go on the attack.

Yes: Losing Tao, next comes Te losing Te, next comes Goodness losing Goodness, next comes Morality losing Morality, next comes Etiquette.

And now Etiquette is loyalty and sincerity spread thin and the first sign of disorders. Foreknowledge is the flower of Tao and the beginning of folly.

And so the great man: Resides with the substance does not stay with what is thin. Resides with the fruit does not stay with the flower. Yes: He leaves 'that' aside and attends to 'this.'

Man representing Great Te does not force Himself to making good deeds: behaving righteously is natural for him.

Man who is far from Te may try to force himself to performing good deeds: righteousness is not natural for him.

Man representing Great Te does not aspire to activity in the world of matter: He acts in the state of non-doing.

Man who is far from Te lives in vanity and acts under the influence of his passions. In the religious aspect of life, his activity is reduced only to rituals; but believing in the "magic" of rituals signifies the degradation of religion! Such man also forces others to act as he does.

This happens only to those who do not have Tao in their lives. They cannot be trusted; they betrayed Tao already and can betray anyone.

The wise who cognized Tao is capable to distinguish people by these features. He chooses to communicate only with the people of good.

The Wise Person doesn't display his virtue that is why he is virtuous.

The ordinary person displays his virtue that is why he is weak.

High virtue doesn't manifest open,

Things are thus finalized properly.

The weak virtue always manifests,

Things are thus not completed.

The
goodness of the Wise Person doesn't have any reason,

Gradually people will follow him.

Being on the Tao Way, the Virtue (Te) follows.

When
the virtue disappears, goodness will appear.

When goodness disappears, compassion is expressed.

When compassion is lost, the rules are installed.

Thus the sincerity and trust disappear,

Confusion and distortion of events become wide spread.

The
Wise Person sees not only the surface but the depth too.

He can see the potential fruit in a flower.

Thus using his virtue he sees the reality

That is behind the transitory manifestation.

The
highest virtue is not virtuous and for that reason has [true] virtue. The lesser
virtue does not lose virtue and for that reason does not have [true] virtue.
The highest virtue does not engage in [forceful] activity and so uses nothing
to do things. <The lesser virtue does things and uses something to do so.>
The highest benevolence does things and does so by means of nothing. The highest
righteousness does things and does so by means of something. The highest propriety
does things and if nothing responds to what it does then it thrusts out its
forearms and forces them. So after the Dao is lost there is virtue. After virtue
is lost, there is benevolence. After benevolence is lost, there is righteousness.
After righteousness is lost, there is propriety. Now propriety is the husk of
faithfulness and trust and the beginning of disorder. The initial discernments
are the detritus of the Dao and the beginnings of ignorance. For this reason
the great man abides in the substantial parts and does not tarry in the husk.
He abides in the solid parts and does not tarry in the detritus. So he rejects
that and accepts this.

He with the highest virtue

Does not display his virtue

And so has virtue.

He with the lowest virtue

Does not let go of virtue

And so has no virtue.

He with the highest virtue does not act

And nothing is left undone.

He with the lowest virtue acts

And has intent to act.

He with the highest human-heartedness acts

And has no intent to act.

He with the highest righteousness acts

And has intent to act.

He with the highest propriety acts

And if there is no response,

Bares his arms to apply force.

Therefore,

When Tao is lost, virtue appears.

When virtue is lost, human-heartedness appears.

When human-heartedness is lost, righteousness appears.

When righteousness is lost, propriety appears.

Propriety is the thinness of loyalty and honesty,

And the beginning of disorder;

Foreknowledge is the ornament of Tao,

And the beginning of ignorance.

Therefore, great gentlemen stay in the thick, and not in the thin.

They stay with the substance, and not with the ornament.

So they reject that to prefer this.

Power Without Motive

Superior Power is never Powerful, thus it has Power.

Inferior Power is always Powerful, thus it has no Power.

Superior Power takes no action and acts withotu motive.

Inferior Power takes action and acts with motive.

Superior philanthropy takes action and acts without motive.

Superior morality takes action and acts with motive.

Superior propriety takes action and there is no response;

So it raises its arm to project itself.

Therefore, lose the Tao and Power follows.

Lose the Power and philanthropy follows.

Lose philanthropy and morality follows.

Lose morality and propriety follows.

One who has propriety has the veneer of truth

And yet is the leader of confusion.

One who knows the future has the luster of the Tao

And yet is ignorant of its origins.

Therefore those wiht the greatest endurance

Can enter the substantial,

Not occupy its veneer;

Can enter reality,

Not occupy its luster.

Hence they discard one and receive the other.

The blossoms of a plum tree greatly please the eye, but do not feed the stomach. The cover of a book does not tell the story. If you do nothing, you leave nothing undone. Live simply in the now. Illusions are for the lost.

A man of highest virtue

Will not display it as his own;

His virtue then is real.

Low virtue makes one miss no chance

To show his virtue off;

His virtue then is naught.

High virtue is at rest;

It knows no need to act.

Low virtue is a busyness

Pretending to accomplishment.

Compassion
at its best

Consists in honest deeds;

Morality at best

Is something done, aforethought;

High etiquette, when acted out

Without response from others,

Constrains a man to bare his arms

And make them do their duty!

Truly,
once the Way is lost,

There comes then virtue;

Virtue lost, comes then compassion;

After that morality;

And when that's lost, there's etiquette,

The husk of all good faith,

The rising point of anarchy.

Foreknowledge
is, they say,

The Doctrine come to flower;

But better yet, it is

The starting point of silliness.

So once full-grown, a man will take

The meat and not the husk,

The fruit and not the flower.

Rejecting one, he takes the other.

The superior virtue does not show itself in formal virtue,

In this way it really possesses virtue.

The inferior virtue rigidly sticks to formal virtue,

In this way it loses virtue.

The superior virtue takes no action to show itself, and need not do so purposefully.

The inferior virtue takes action to show itself, and does so purposefully.

The superior benevolence takes action to show itself, and does so on purpose.

The superior righteousness takes action to show itself, and does so on purpose.

The superior propriety takes action to show itself,

And when it gets no response, it will stretch its arms and retaliate.

Therefore, only when Tao is lost does De arise,

Only when De is lost does benevolence arise,

Only when benevolence is lost does righteousness arise,

Only when righteousness is lost does propriety arise.

The thing that is called propriety is really the want of loyalty and faithfulness and the beginning of disorder.

The thing that is called foresight is really the ornament of Tao and the beginning of ignorance.

For this reason the great man dwells in the thick and keeps away from the thin,

He dwells in plainness and keeps away from the ornament.

Therefore he rejects the latter and accepts the former.

A person of superior virtue is not virtuous, and this is why he has virtue.

A person of inferior virtue never loses virtue, and this is why he lacks virtue.

A person of superior virtue takes no conscious action and so acts out of nothing.

A person of inferior virtue takes conscious action and so acts out of something.

When a person of superior benevolence takes action, he acts out of nothing.

When a person of superior righteousness takes action, he acts out of something.

When a person of superior propriety takes action and no one responds, he pushes up his sleeves and leads them to it.

Therefore one resorts to virtue only after losing the Dao, resorts to benevolence only after losing virtue, resorts to righteousness only after losing benevolence, and resorts to propriety only after losing righteousness.

Propriety consists of the superficial aspects of loyalty and trust and is thus the beginning of disorder.

Foresight consists of the flower of the Dao and is thus the origin of duplicity.

This is why the really great man involves himself with its substance and not with its superficial aspects.

He involves himself with its fruit and not with its flower.

Therefore he rejects the one and takes the other.

1. The highest virtue is not virtuous; therefore it truly has virtue.

2. The lowest virtue never loses sight of its virtue; therefore it has no true
virtue.

3.
The highest virtue takes no action, yet it has no reason for acting this way;

4. The highest humanity takes action, yet it has no reason for acting this way;

5. The highest righteousness takes action, and it has its reason for acting
this way;

6. The highest propriety takes action, and when no one responds to it, then
it angrily rolls up its sleeves and forces people to comply.

7.
Therefore, when the Way is lost, only then do we have virtue;

8. When virtue is lost, only then do we have humanity;

9. When humanity is lost, only then do we have righteousness;

10. And when righteousness is lost, only then do we have propriety.

11.
As for propriety, it's but the thin edge of loyalty and sincerity, and the beginning
of disorder.

12. And foreknowledge is but the flower of the Way, and the beginning of stupidity.

13.
Therefore the Great Man

14. Dwells in the thick and doesn't dwell in the thin;

15. Dwells in the fruit and doesn't dwell in the flower.

16. Therefore, he rejects that and takes this.

People with
integrity

don't even think about it.

That's how you can tell

they have integrity.

Other people talk about

how much integrity they have,

when they really don't have much.

If any.

Truly powerful
people

don't do anything,

but they get the job done.

Other people are always busy

doing something,

but nothing ever gets done.

When kind people
act,

they do so without thinking about it.

When the just act,

they're always sure

they're doing the right thing.

But when the righteous act,

and nobody reacts,

they try to force everyone

to do things their way.

If you're not
in touch with Tao,

at least you can still have integrity.

If you don't have integrity,

there's always kindness.

If you don't have kindness,

there's always justice.

If you don't have justice,

all you have left is righteousness.

Righteousness
is an pale imitation

of true faith and loyalty,

and always leads to trouble.

If you've already made up your mind,

you don't know the first thing about Tao,

and you never will.

The Masters
pay attention

to what's beneath the surface.

They'll look at a tree's leaves,

but eat the fruit.

They turn all that down,

so they can accept this.

.

The Superior

Superior power does not emphasize its power,

and thus is powerful.

Inferior power never forgets its power,

and thus is powerless.

Superior power never interferes nor has an ulterior motive.

Inferior power interferes and has an ulterior motive.

Superior humanity takes action but has no ulterior motive.

Superior morality takes action and has an ulterior motive.

Superior custom takes action, and finding no response,

stretches out arms to force it on them.

Therefore when the Way is lost, power arises.

When power is lost, humanity arises.

When humanity is lost, morality arises.

When morality is lost, custom arises.

Now custom is a superficial expression

of loyalty and faithfulness, and the beginning of disorder.

Foreknowledge is the flowering of the Way

and the beginning of folly.

Therefore the mature dwell in the depth, not in the thin,

in the fruit and not in the flowering.

They reject one and accept the other.

Teh true virtue does not intend to be virtuous

That is why it is right and leads to completion.

Virtue eager to be known as virtuous is useless.

True virtue is at work invisibly without intention and without action.

Where there is intention and action in the visible there is cleverness but not virtue.

Goodness is at work but without calculation and intention.

Justice is at work calculates and has intentions.

Morality is at work calculates and meets resistance with force.

Therefore:

If the essential thing is missing the oneness with TA resort to virtue.

If the spontaneity of virtue is missing find support in goodness.

If goodness is lacking be just.

If the feeling for Right is missing only morality remains ....

Morality is outer-only virtue without a link with the inner leading to unreality, and useless for man's completion.

That is why the Sage turns to the essential thing inward instead of outward to the kernel instead of the shell to Being instead of appearance and letting-go all striving becomes a serene carrier of the virtue of the Tao.

Degeneration

Lao Tze says,

The superior Teh is not conscious of virtue, thus it matches the essence of virtue.

The secondary Teh is conscious of virtue, thus it leaves the essence of virtue.

The man of the superior Teh works by acting without the intent to control fate; the people think he has done nothing else.

The man of the secondary Teh does work by acting with the intent to control fate and the people think he has done a lot of work.

The man of benevolence has done a lot of work, but through acting without the intent to control fate.

The man of righteousness has done a lot of work, this is through acting with intent to control fate.

The man of ritualism has done a lot of work, however he can't get the resonance of approval, thus he would force others to express their appreciation.

Therefore,

when the Tao is not in use, they seek benevolence;

when the benevolence is not in use, they seek ritualism.

However, the ritualism is the production of the lack of the loyalty and the faith, and it is even the beginning of confusion.

The above mentioned men understand Tao's extravagance only.

They are the founders of stupidity.

Henceforth, a true great man should choose Tao's abundance instead of Tao's deficiency.

He should choose Tao's essence instead of Tao's extravagance.

Thus, a Tao practician should learn to choose the former, and despise the latter.

THE CONCERNS OF THE GREAT

A
truly good man is unaware

of the good deeds he performs.

Conversely, a foolish man must try

continuously to be good.

A
good man seems to do little or nought,

yet he leaves nothing undone.

A foolish man must always strive,

whilst leaving much undone.

The
man who is truly wise and kind

leaves nothing to be done,

but he who only acts

according to his nation's law

leaves many things undone.

A
disciplinarian wanting something done

rolls up his sleeves,

enforcing it with violence.

It
may be that goodness still remains,

even when the natural way is lost,

and that kindness still exists

when goodness is forgotten.

It may be that justice still remains

when the people are no longer kind,

and when this is lost, that ritual still remains.

However, ritual may be performed

only as an act of faith,

and may be the beginning of confusion,

for even divination and the such

are but the flowery trappings of the Tao,

and are the beginning of great folly.

He
who is truly great

does not upon the surface dwell,

but on what lies beneath.

It is said that the fruit is his concern,

rather than the flower.

Each must decide what it might be he seeks,

the flowery trapping,

which comes to summer fullness first,

or the fruit which is beneath.

The Master doesn't try to be powerful;

thus he is truly powerful.

The ordinary man keeps reaching for power;

thus he never has enough.

The Master does nothing,

yet he leaves nothing undone.

The ordinary man is always doing things,

yet many more are left to be done.

The kind man does something,

yet something remains undone.

The just man does something,

and leaves many things to be done.

The moral man does something,

and when no one responds

he rolls up his sleeves and uses force.

When the Tao is lost, there is goodness.

When goodness is lost, there is morality.

When morality is lost, there is ritual.

Ritual is the husk of true faith,

the beginning of chaos.

Therefore the Master concerns himself

with the depths and not the surface,

with the fruit and not the flower.

He has no will of his own.

He dwells in reality,

and lets all illusions go.

When conduct is of high virtue, one is unconscious of virtue, thus he can accomplish virtue.

When conduct is of low virtue, one is conscious of virtue, thus he cannot accomplish virtue.

High virtue does not contrive and has no desire for gain.

Low virtue also does not contrive but has desire for gain.

High benevolence does contrive yet it has no desire for gain.

High righteousness does contrive and also has desire for gain.

High ritual does not only contrive and desire, but is also violent:

if it finds no response at all, it resorts to fighting its way out with stretched arms.

Hence when Dao is losing, then its virtues are losing.

When virtues are losing, benevolence is encouraged.

When benevolence is losing, the righteousness is encouraged.

When righteousness is losing, then rituals are encouraged.

Rituals stand for the lack of loyalty and reliability and are the beginning of disorder.

Divination stands for the emotional performance of Dao and is the beginning of stupidity.

Therefore the superior man prefers to possess few things rather than an abundance, to have insight rather than to see superficially.

Thus he prefers insight to superficiality.

Eminent action is inaction,

For that action it is active.

Inferior action never stops acting,

For that reason it is inactive.

Eminent action is disengaged,

Yet nothing is left unfulfilled;

Eminent humanness engages,

Yet nothing is left unfulfilled;

When eminent righteousness engages,

It reduces the results of engagements;

Eminent justice engages, but does not respond adequately to situations.

For that reason it is frustrated.

When Tao is lost,

It becomes Action;

When Action is lost,

It becomes benevolence;

When benevolence is lost,

It becomes justice.

When justice is lost,

It becomes propriety.

Propriety is the veneer of faith and loyalty,

And the forefront of troubles.

Foresight is the vain display of Tao,

And the forefront of foolishness.

Therefore, the man of substance

Dwells in wholeness rather than veneer,

Dwells in the essence rather than the vain display.

He rejects the latter, and accepts the former.

XXXVIII

True
mastery always seems artless

The more it must be proclaimed, the less masterful it is

The
virtuous act as the tao moves them, without forethought or reason

The good have an end in mind, but act from the heart

The righteous have an end and a means, and wave them like a flag

And when the righteous lose their faith in humanity

They roll up their sleeves and fight the good fight

And the thread of the way becomes tangled beyond recognition

Consider...

At
best, we are like infants; we do nothing and everyone smiles

Failing that, we try to sense what makes those around us happy

When that fails, we turn to abstractions - rules of truth, of justice, of order

But such abstractions are merely the flower of the way

Beautiful and bitter, full of hope and anger and violence

Rigid and fragile as crystal

What
can this bring to the world but disorder?

Thoughtless ideology can only lead to cynical indifference

Flowers bloom and fade and wither away, no matter what

So the taoist lets them be, and reaches for the fruit instead

Higher Virtue Is Not Ingratiating

Higher virtue is not ingratiating;

that is why it has virtue.

Lower virtue does not forget about reward;

that is why it is virtueless.

Higher virtue is uncontrived,

and there is no way to contrive it.

Lower virtue is created,

and there is a way to do it.

Higher humanity is created,

but there is no way to contrive it.

Higher duty is done,

and there is a way to do it.

Higher courtesy is done,

but no one responds to it;

so there is forceful repetition.

Therefore virtue comes after loss of the Way;

humanity comes after loss of virtue,

duty comes after loss of humanity,

courtesy comes after loss of duty.

Manners mean loyalty and trust are thin,

and disarray's beginning.

Foresight is a flower of the Way,

and the beginning of ignorance too.

Therefore great people dwell in the thick,

not the thin.

They abide in the substance,

not the flower.

So they leave the latter and take the former.

High Te is Te because it is not showy.

Low Te is not Te because it is showy.

People with high Te do not force their way but they have their way.

People with low Te have no way except to force their way.

Top benevolence standard has its way without forcing it.

Top moral conduct has its way with efforts.

Top ritual rules have their way with rare response.

Then force is used to make people comply.

Therefore, when Tao is lost, Te is established.

When Te is lost, a benevolent standard is established.

When the benevolent standard is lost, moral conduct is established.

When moral conduct is lost, ritual rules are established.

So-called ritual rules do not advocate honesty and trustworthiness.

Thus, they are the source of disorder.

Boasting scholars are the flashy decorations of Tao; they are the origin of stupidity.

Consequently, great men stay with profoundness, avoid superficiality.

They stay with substance, avoid flashy superficies.

That is, they take former and avoid latter.

The man of high virtue has no virtue; therefore he is virtuous.

The man of low virtue never loses virtue; therefore he is not virtuous.

The man of high virtue does not do and has nothing to do.

The man of low virtue does and has something to do.

The man of high benevolence does, and has nothing to do.

The man of high righteousness does, and has something to do.

The man of high propriety does and is not responded, therefore he rolls up his sleeves and forces people to follow him.

Hence, losing the Way, man resorts to Virtue.

Losing Virtue, man resorts to benevolence.

Losing benevolence, man resorts to righteousness.

Losing righteousness, man resorts to propriety.

Propriety is the merest husk of faith and loyalty, and the beginning of disorder.

Foreknowledge is the flower (outside beauty) of the Way, and the beginning of foolishness.

Therefore, the great man sets his heart upon the thick rather than the thin, upon the fruit rather than the flower.

Hence, he drops what is without and keeps what is within.

High Teh (virtue), not Teh (not showing), is Teh.

Lower Teh, not lost Teh (showing Teh), is not Teh.

High Teh Wu-Wei, thus not much to do.

Low Teh, doing many, thus many things need to be done.

Higher Jen (highest love), doing things (being loving), and not much to do.

Higher iL (Justice), doing things (for justice), and much needs to be done.

Higher Li (ways of conduct), doing things,

and don't know which conduct should be used,

shake hands, touch elbow?

After Tao is lost, there is Teh.

After Teh is lost, there is Jen.

After Jen is lost, there is iL.

After iL is lost, there is Li.

We need Li, because now lacking loyalty and honesty.

Li is the beginning of chaos.

Who with futuristic vision, seeing only the surface of Tao,

a beginning of ignorance.

Therefore the truly great man dwells on what is solid,

not on what is shallow,

on the fruit, not the flower.

Choose this, not that.

A person of high virtue is not conscious of virtue

and therefore possesses Virtue.

A person of little virtue tries to be virtuous

and therefore lacks Virtue.

A person of high vir-tue does not make a fuss

and is not seen.

A person of little virtue always makes a fuss

and is always seen.

A truly good person functions without ulterior motive.

A moralist acts out of private desires.

A ritualist acts and, when no one responds,

rolls up a sleeve and marches.

When
we lose the Tao, we turn to Virtue.

When we lose Virtue, we turn to kindness.

When we lose kindness, we turn to morality.

When we lose morality, we turn to ritual.

Ritual
is the mere husk of good faith and loyalty

and the beginning of disorder.

Knowledge of what is to come

may be a flower of the Tao,

but it is the beginning of folly.

Hence,
the well-formed person relies on what is solid

and not on what is flimsy,

on the fruit and not the flower.

Therefore, such a person lets go of that without

and is cont:ent with this within.

Intelligent
people have no need of degrees or titles or recognition to display their true
knowledge.

Ignorant people need to demonstrate their intelligence in every way possible,
and cannot shake the image of ignorance.

A truly good person does good unconsciously,

has no need of goodness or morality or ethics,

and is not viewed as being good.

An average person works hard at doing

good works and acting morally

but is still regarded as average.

Goodness is complete,

justice is always only partial.

When proper procedure is not followed

righteous people roll up their sleeves and enforce it.

When the path is lost, power remains;

when power is lost, religion remains;

when religion is lost, morality remains;

when morality is lost, patriotism remains.

Patriotism is only the appearance of civility

and is the first step to fighting and war.

Predicting what will happen is only a mirage of the way

and a step off of the path.

The
wise person dwells in the here and now

and not in the past, the future, or the may-be,

choosing the fruit for sustenance, not the flower.

Embrace one, reject the other.

The man of superior [scholar] virtue is hardly (conscious of his) virtue, and
so he is virtuous.

Superior virtue is hardly (conscious of) its virtue. [Or could it be that superior
virtue is hardly virtue at all?]

The high-standing man hardly ever shows off the has some supreme powers or prowess
deep inside himself. He keeps such powers, and in this way he really owns virtue.

The man of low virtue is hardly losing virtue, and so he is devoid of virtue.
The man of low virtue can lose sight of some virtue by never losing sight of
it. Rather low or indecent power" can't get rid of the appearance of being some
power'; [There's no scoffed, angrily sulking Messiah power'].

No one thinks a man of highest calibre acts. No one thinks he ever acts with
ulterior motives.

The man of low virtue acts from himself, and very often with an ulterior motive
- and is so regarded -

The man of super-kindness also acts, but with no irksome, ulterior motives.
But all folks never think the superman acts.

The man of superior justice acts but has no ulterior motive to do so, and maybe
with an ulterior motive, as he who is best in ritual acts not merely acts. (Yes,
when) the man of superior morality acts and finds no response, he rolls up his
sleeves and stretches his arms or advances upon them to force it on others.

So:

Only when dao is lost does [said] virtue arise. When [spoken-of] virtue is lost,
only then does [a parade of] kind humanity rise. Such good kindness is lost,
then (comes some sort of or endorsement of) just moral: When humanist riches
deep inside are lost, only then comes [conform, outer-directed] normal righteousness.
When righteousness is lost, only then propriety pops up.

[And now it stands up: Boss-given, endorsed] morality can be the thinning out
of loyalty and honesty of heart and the start of chaos. [Inner, hearty] morality
lost, then propriety or semi-ritual. So [much] ritual endorsement could be the
mere husk of loyalty and promise-keeping. [And so, all in all,] good, seemly
propriety is a superficial expression of loyalty and faithfulness, and the start
of chaos or disorder.

Those
who are the first to know, let words of dao flower, and in the end it's an origin
of folly. From this the great or noble man dwells in the solid, heavy and thick
(base), and not in the superficial or thinned (end). Yes, he dwells in reality,
which is a fruit, and not in the show of appearances, or flowering (expression).

Therefore he rejects the one and accepts the other.

The person of superior integrity

does not insist upon his integrity;

For this reason, he has integrity.

The person of inferior integrity

never loses sight of his integrity;

For this reason, he lacks integrity.

The person of superior integrity takes no action,

nor has he a purpose for acting.

The person of superior humaneness takes action,

but has no purpose for acting.

The person of superior righteousness takes action,

and has a purpose for acting.

The person of superior etiquette takes action,

but others do not respond to him;

Whereupon he rolls up his sleeves and coerces them.

Therefore,

When the Way is lost,

afterward comes integrity.

When integrity is lost,

afterward comes humaneness.

When humaneness is lost,

afterward comes righteousness.

When righteousness is lost,

afterward comes etiquette.

Now,

Etiquette is the attenuation of trustworthiness, and the source of disorder.

Foreknowledge is but the blossomy ornament of the Way, and the source of ignorance.

For this reason,

The great man resides in substance, not in attenuation.

He resides in fruitful reality, not in blossomy ornament.

Therefore,

He rejects the one and adopts the other.

The superior virtue is not recognized as such, and it is therefore the very essence of virtue.

The inferior virtue has the distinction of virtue, therefore it lacks the essence.

The superior virtue is spontaneous, and makes no claim to merit.

The inferior virtue is designing, and lays claim to recognition.

The higher benevolence acts without pretension to merit.

The inferior justice acts, and also makes pretensions.

The inferior expediency is designing, and therefore no one honours it.

Therefore does it bare its arm and assert itself by force.

Thus it transpires that when virtue is lost, benevolence takes its place.

When benevolence is lost, justice ensues.

When justice is lost, then expediency follows.

But expediency is the mere shadow of what is right and true, and it is portentous of confusion.

Superficial virtue is the mere tinsel of Tao, and the fool makes use of it.

But the truly great man establishes himself on that which is solid, and will not lean upon a shadow.

He keeps to the real, and avoids display.

He rejects the one, and takes the other with both hands.

Will Power

If the heart of your relationship is lost,

you will try to hang on by willpower.

Willpower will fail and be replaced

by the appearance of good behavior.

Keeping up appearances

is the beginning of the end.

The energy of your love

must arise from deeper sources.

Force of will can be a virtue.

It can carry you through some dry and barren times.

But it cannot substitute for the deeper springs

of energy, passion and joy

that first brought you together.

Keep these springs alive!

Know how to find your way back to them

when you wander away.

Drink always from them.

The man of superior virtue is not (conscious of) his virtue, And in
this way he really possesses virtue. The man of inferior virtue never
loses (sight of) his virtue, And in this way he loses his virtue.

The man of superior virtue takes no action, but has no ulterior motive
to do so. The man of inferior virtue takes action, and has an ulterior
motive to do so.

The man of superior humanity takes action, but has no ulterior motive
to do so. The man of superior righteousness takes action, and has an
ulterior motive to do so. The man of superior propriety takes action,
And when people do not respond to it, he will stretch his arms and force
it on them.

Therefore when Tao is lost, only then does the doctrine of virtue
arise. When virtue is lost, only then does the doctrine of humanity
arise. When humanity is lost, only then does the doctrine of
righteousness arise. When righteousness is lost, only then does the
doctrine of propriety arise.

Now, propriety is a superficial expression of loyalty and
faithfulness, and the beginning of disorder. Those who are the first to
know have the flowers of Tao but are the beginning of ignorance.

For this reason the great man dwells in the thick, and does not rest
with the thin. He dwells in the fruit, and does not rest with the
flower. Therefore he rejects the one, and accepts the other.

A man of sure
fitness, without making a point of his fitness,

Stays fit;

A man of unsure fitness, assuming an appearance of fitness,

Becomes unfit.

The man of sure fitness never makes an act of it

Nor considers what it may profit him;

The man of unsure fitness makes an act of it

And considers what it may profit him.

However a man with a kind heart proceed,

He forgets what it may profit him;

However a man with a just mind proceed,

He remembers what it may profit him;

However a man of conventional conduct proceed, if he be not complied with

Out goes his fist to enforce compliance.

Here is what happens:

Losing the way of life, men rely first on their fitness;

Losing fitness, they turn to kindness;

Losing kindness, they turn to justness;

Losing justness, they turn to convention.

Conventions are fealty and honesty gone to waste,

They are the entrance of disorder.

False teachers of life use flowery words

And start nonsense.

The man of stamina stays with the root

Below the tapering,

Stays with the fruit

Beyond the flowering:

He has his no and he has his yes.

The people who have high DE do not purposely show the DE, but ultimately have the DE.

The people who have low DE are always afraid of not showing the DE, but ultimately lose the DE.

The people who have high DE practice WUWEI, but ultimately get everything done.

The people who have low DE do things purposely, but ultimately fail in many things.

The kind people do not do things purposely, but get everything done well.

The highly righteous people do things purposely, but ultimately fail in many things.

The people who follow courtesy and orders do everything purposely, but when no one follows them, they rudely force people to do so.

Therefore, when the DAO is lost, charity appears;

When charity is lost, righteousness appears;

When righteousness is lost, courtesy and order appear.

Courtesy and order have little loyalty and faith, and they are the source of chaos.

Therefore, they are the end of the DAO and the beginning of a dark age.

Noble men always stay sturdy, not shallow; solid, not flimsy.

So one should keep the former and get rid of the latter.

The person of authentic virtue makes no issue of his virtue.

Therefore, he is virtuous, wholly and completely.

The person of inauthentic virtue makes much issue of his virtue.

Therefore, he is not virtuous, wholly and completely.

Authentic virtue is a matter of being, not of doing.

Therefore, the person of authentic virtue makes no claims for his virtuous action.

Inauthentic virtue is a matter of doing, not of being.

Therefore, the person of inauthentic virtue makes claims for his virtuous action.

Superior benevolence is a matter of doing.

Yet the person of superior benevolence makes no claims for his benevolent deeds.

Superior rectitude is a matter of doing.

And the person of superior rectitude makes claims for his righteous deeds.

Superior etiquette is a matter of doing.

But the person of superior etiquette,

If people do not conform to his standard,

Will pull their elbows and force them to conform.

When the Tao is lost, then comes virtue.

When virtue is lost, then comes benevolence.

When benevolence is lost, then comes rectitude.

When rectitude is lost, then comes etiquette.

Etiquette is but the attenuation of probity and the beginning of disorder.

Prescience is but a flower of the Tao and the beginning of nescience.

For this reason,

The person of character dwells in the depths within, not in the shallows without.

He dwells in the fruitful substance within, not in the flowery embellishment without.

He thus chooses the inner and discards the outer.

The virtuous getter does not get,

And is therefore getting something better.

The worst getter does not give what he/she gets

And is therefore getting something worse.

The best getter does nothing for nothing.

The kind giver does something for nothing.

The faithful contractor does something for something.

The ceremony holder does things but is not responded to,

For ceremony means lack of faithfulness

And the start of social disorders.

Predictive knowledge is the turbulence of the Way

And the beginning of folly.

Therefore, the reasonable person

Will stay in the thick center of the Way

Instead of its tumbling thin edge,

And will prefer the solid spot of the Way

Instead of its turbulence.

True virtue is itself virtuous, and does not need to try to appear virtuous.

The common man may try to show the semblance of virtue, but this showing is in itself a revealing of the lack of virtue.

Those of high virtue never accomplish any act out of need for show, or ulterior motive.

The 'seemingly virtuous' will make a big show of the virtuous acts they perform.

A virtuous person will act according to what is right regardless of the situation at all times.

A common person will act according to the results he expects from the action, if the results are not to his benefit he will not do them.

A low person will act and expect response from others, if he does not secure his riches he will use force to extract it.

When the Tao is lost in a person or land one must resort to righteousness to rule society.

When righteousness is lost one has to use morality.

When morality has been abandoned there is only ritual to conduct society.

But ritual is only the outer clothing of true belief; this is nearing chaos.

