===== Chapter 55 =====

Containing the substantiality of virtue

Is comparable to [being like] a bare child:

Poisonous insects do not sting [you].

Savage beasts do not seize [you].

Snatching birds do not take [you].

[The child's] bones are tender

Its muscles are soft.

But its grip is firm.

It does not yet know the union of female and male

And yet it's completely made:

The utmost of vitality indeed!

Throughout the day crying and not becoming hoarse:

The utmost of harmony indeed!

Knowing harmony is called the Constant.

Knowing the Constant is called clarity.

Promoting life is said to be auspicious.

The mind ordering ch'i is said to be violent.

A strong thing ruling over what is Old—

This is called "non-Tao."

The non-Tao soon ends.

Be filled with Te, Like a baby: Wasps, scorpions and vipers Do not sting
it. Fierce tigers do not stalk it. Birds of prey do not attack it.
Bones weak, muscles soft, But its grasp is tight.

It does not yet know Union of male and female, But its sex is formed, Its vital essence complete.

It can scream all day and not get hoarse, Its harmony is complete.
Knowing harmony is called endurance. Knowing endurance is called
illumination.

Increasing life is called fortune. Mind controlling energy is called power.

When beings prosper and grow old, Call them not-Tao. Not-Tao soon ends.

The one who has virtue in its fullness

Is like a newborn babe.

Hornets and snakes do not sting him.

Savage beasts don't attack him.

Birds of prey don't pounce on him.

His bones are soft and his muscles weak

But his grasp is firm.

He knows nothing yet of mating

But his organ stirs

For his vigor is at its height.

He will cry all day

But his voice will remain loud.

For his harmony is at its height.

If you know harmony you know what is constant.

If you know what is constant you are enlightened.

If your mind forces your breath you misuse your strength.

You misuse your strength.

What expands too much is bound to collapse.

This is not the way of Tao.

What goes against Tao soon declines.

AS A NEWBORN

Possessing Te in abundance,

One is as a newborn infant -

Protected from the sting of poisonous creatures,

Protected from being seized by fierce beasts or mauled by clawing birds.

Tho' its bones are tender and muscles weak, Its grip is strong.

Not yet knowing the union of male and female,

The potential for such union is evident -

Its vitality is high.

Able to cry aloud all day and night and not lose its voice,

Truly its natural inner harmony is supreme.

Aware of inner harmony, Eternal reality is known.

Aware of eternal reality, Insight and enlightenment emerge.

However:

Constant living at one's peak of activity is to court disaster.

Compulsive intellectualization drains energy from the spirit.

Such vigor leads to exhaustion and decay and is not the way of the Tao.

Being contrary to the Tao, It must - soon perish.

Embody the action of the soul in its fullness.

Join with it to be as open as a newborn infant.

The bee, scorpion, serpent, and snake, will not bite.

Wild animals will not attack.

Birds of prey will not strike.

Even with weak bones and tender muscles you will be able to stand firm.

It does not know male-female union, yet the whole comes into being.

The life force is at its height!

You can cry all day and you are not hoarse.

Harmony is at its height!

You know that harmony is known as the eternal.

You know that the eternal is called the light.

The increase in your life force is a blessing.

Directing the chi with your mind is violent.

Things overdevelop, which is followed by exhaustion.

This is not the Tao.

What is not the Tao soon ends.

THE SPELL OF THE MYSTERY

He that hath the Magick powers of the Tao is like a young child.

Insects will not sting him or beasts or birds of prey attack him.

The
young child's bones are tender and its sinews are elastic, but its

grasp is firm. It knoweth nothing of the Union of Man and Woman, yet its

Organ may be excited. This is because of its natural perfection. It will

cry all day long without becoming hoarse, because of the harmony of its

being.

He
who understandeth this harmony knoweth the mystery of the Tao, and

becometh a True Sage. All devices for inflaming life, and increasing the

vital Breath, by mental effort are evil and

factitious.

Things
become strong, then age. This is in discord with the Tao, and

what is not at one with the Tao soon cometh to an end.

He who has in himself abundantly the attributes (of the Tao) is likean infant. Poisonous insects will not sting him; fierce beasts will notseize him; birds of prey will not strike him. (The infant's) bones areweak and its sinews soft, ut yet its grasp is firm. It knows not yet theunion of male and female, and yet its virile member may be excited;-showingthe perfection of its physical essence. All day long it will cry withoutits throat becoming hoarse;-showing the harmony (in its constitution).

To him by whom this harmony is known, (The secret of) the unchanging(Tao) is shown, And in the knowledge wisdom finds its throne. All life-increasingarts to evil turn; Where the mind makes the vital breath to burn, (False)is the strength, (and o'er it we should mourn.)

When things have become strong, they (then) become old, which may besaid to be contrary to the Tao. Whatever is contrary to the Tao soon ends.

A true human being is like a new-born baby

Wasps and scorpions won't sting it, snakes and adders won't bite it

Raptors and wild animals won't attack it

Its bones and muscles are soft and flexible, yet it has a pretty tight grip

Sex and libido are strange to it, but its little penis already is able to stiffen

That is because its nature is not yet disturbed by thoughts

It can yell all day without getting a hoarse throat

Because everything is still perfectly in balance

Experiencing that balance is called "living in the eternal present"

Living without past or future is called "being wise"

Every attempt to extend life is pointless

One who wants to control his life, restrains oneself

It is unnatural that things wither

That which is unnatural will come to an early end

He who is intelligent is like a little child. Poisonous insects do not sting him. Ferocious beasts do not attack him. Wild birds do not claw him. His bones are soft, his muscles weak, yet is grip is strong.

Because he has no urge for sexual union, he is fully satisfied. His vitality is intact.

He can cry all day without getting hoarse. His existence is harmonious. To know such harmony is to be in accord with Nature.

To be in accord with Nature is to be achieving the goal of life. But to seek excitement is to invite calamity. Those too eager for activity soon become fatigued.

For when things exhaust their vigour, they age quickly. Such impatience is against Nature. What is against Nature dies young.

The impunity of things fraught with the "power"

May be likened to that of an infant.

Poisonous insects do not sting it,

Nor fierce beasts seize it,

Nor clawing birds maul it,

Its bones are soft, its sinews weak; but its grip is strong.

Not yet to have known the union of male and female,

But to be completely formed,

Means that the vital force is at its height;

To be able to scream all day without getting hoarse

Means that the harmony is at its perfection.

To understand such harmony is to understand the always so.

To understand the always-so is to be illumined.

But to fill life to the brim is to invite omens.

If the heart makes calls upon the life-breath, rigidity follows.

Whatever has a time of vigour also has a time of decay.

Such things are against Tao,

And whatever is against Tao is soon destroyed.

A man of Virtue can be compared to a newborn child.

Snakes and scorpions do not strike him.

Fierce beasts do not prey upon him.

Birds of prey do not attack him.

Though his bones are soft and his muscles weak,

his grip is firm.

Without knowing the union of man and woman,

his organ stands erect.

His vital force is strong.

He can scream all day without becoming hoarse.

His harmony is perfect.

To know harmony is to know the everlasting.

To know the everlasting is enlightenment.

To interfere with life is ill-fated.

To control the breath causes strain.

If you exert yourself you will become exhausted.

This is not in harmony with Tao.

What is not in harmony with Tao does not long endure.

To embody virtue's substance

Compares to the naked infant

Wasps & scorpions, vipers & serpents do not bite

Wild beasts do not seize

Birds of prey do not strike

The bones are flexible, the muscles are soft,

but the grip is sure

Not yet knowing the union of woman & man

But the penis is aroused

Essence is at its prime here!

Howling all day, but not getting hoarse

Harmony is at its prime here!

To comprehend harmony speaks of the continuous

To comprehend the continuous speaks of clarity

The enrichment of life may be called a "happy omen"

The mind directing the breath may be called a "power"

(But) beings grown mighty will then grow frail

This may be called "off the path"

Off the path is soon finished

Love and Nature

One who embraces the fullness of Virtue

Can be compared with a newborn child.

Wasps and scorpions, snakes and vipers

Will not sting him;

Birds of prey and fierce beasts

Do not seize him;

His bones are soft, his muscles weak and pliant,

Yet his grip is firm.

He has not experienced the union of

Man and woman, yet his organ is aroused.

This is because his essence is at his height.

He can scream all day,

Yet without becoming hoarse.

This is because his harmony is at its height.

To know harmony is called "the constant."

To know the constant is called "being wise."

To add on to life is called "a bad omen."

For the mind to control the breath -

That is called "forcing things."

When things has reached their prime they get old.

This is called "not the way of Tao."

What is not the Way

Will come to an early end.

She who is filled with goodness is like a newborn child: wasps and snakes will not bite it, fierce beasts will not attack it, birds of prey will not pounce on it. Its bones are soft and its muscles weak, but its grip is firm.

It hasn't yet known the union of male and female, yet its organ stirs with vitality.

It can howl all day without becoming hoarse, so perfect is its harmony. To know harmony is to know the eternal. To know the eternal is to be illumined.

Prolonging life is not harmonious./ Coercing the breath is unnatural.

Things which are overdeveloped must decay. All this is contrary to Tao, and whatever is contrary to Tao soon ceases to be.

One whose inner strength is full and clear

Seems like one who's just arrived

From another world.

To him, the bee has no sting,

The serpent, no venom.

To him, the wild beasts

Have no teeth or claws.

To him, predatory birds

Present no menace.

His skeleton seems weak,

His muscles tender,

Yet he's got a grip like a vise.

He appears to lack experience

In the dance of sexual relations-

Yet his genitals are fully formed,

And he knows how to use them.

People yell every day,

Never seeming to get hoarse.

But his peace is unshakeable-

Its source is the Enduring Harmony.

Knowing the eternal is called

The subtle illumination.

Thus is his body's life

The only blessing he needs.

So how could we speak

Of controlling the mind,

Or directing chi to further violence?

The pursuit of power soon exhausts itself:

Such strength is not from Tao.

Whatever is not from Tao

Is already dead.

Here the poet imagines a being who has just arrived from another world, and how such a one may be entirely unconscious of the fears and pretences of humans. In this he finds a metaphor for the follower of Tao who has developed, or rather revealed, his true inner self. We are reminded of the stark imagery of Chapter 20, where the contrast is drawn between himself and the followers of the collective. There we met the poet himself—weak, naive, strange, dull, and separate—divorced from the world of purchase and competition, of power and control, of pursuit and its incipient fear. For himself, Lao Tzu can only explain that he is indeed different, for he "drinks from the breast of the Sublime Mother."

Then, here in Chapter 55, the "alien" metaphor is even more vividly raised, so that it is almost reified: the subject of this poem is one who simply has no inner discourse with the values and fears of the collective, yet the positive bounty that comes of that separation is made clear. This person is strong, sexually able and (presumably) active, secure in the consciousness that "his body's life is the only blessing he needs." He has no need of new age gimmicks—mind control, self-improvement, or the nurturing of physical power through the manipulation of the life force within him. This person has all he needs in his physical being and its freedom from the constraints and self-conscious fears bred by ideologies and systems of religion or other forms of group belief. This, indeed, is his "subtle illumination": he is beyond the fixation with appearances; his understanding reaches past collective perception, past the pursuit of power, beyond intellect and deep into the realm of his feeling nature.

One note on translation must be added, since this rendering departs significantly from traditional texts, where the phrase chih tzu is taken to symbolize the follower of Tao as an infant or baby. I was guided to see that phrase as a compound that actually entails a play on words with Lao Tzu's own name (the same character can mean both "baby" and "philosopher"), the meaning of the whole being "one who is newly arrived." From there, it was no great stretch of imagination to see that the poet was thinking of a person or being who had appeared on earth from another world. This image seems to better resonate with the descriptions that follow it, and to emphasize the unique inner separation discussed above. It also places an appropriate context on the line chung jih hao erh pu sha, which is normally taken to refer to the baby that cries all day without getting hoarse. Clearly, Lao Tzu would not wish for us to draw such a comparison between a wailing infant and one who is said (in the very next line) to possess an "unshakeable peace." Indeed, there is no subject specified for whoever is crying or yelling; I found that it made the most inner sense as a comparison between the noise of the collective and the peace of the one in harmony with himself and his Origin.

Whoever has Teh is like a child:

Poisonous
insects will not bit.

Wild animals will not attack.

Predatory birds will not strike.

Bones
soft, muscles weak, but gripping strongly.

Unconcerned about sex yet most vigorous.

Crying out all day long but not hoarse.

This
involves perfect harmony.

Knowing harmony is to approach the eternal.

Knowing the eternal is to be enlightened.

To
become excitable leads to confusion.

To freely vent emotions is to be aggressive.

Things
reach their prime and then decline.

To be impatient is to oppose Tao.

Whatever opposes Tao dies young.

Who cherishes energy in abundance is comparable to a child. Poisonous insects will not sting him; fierce beasts will not seize him; birds of prey will not strike him.

His bones are weak; his sinews pliable; his grip firm; unconscious of sex, his virility is active – the excellency of his physique. He may cry all day without become hoarse – this is the consummation of harmony.

Knowledge of harmony is called "The unalterable;" knowledge of the Unalterable is called "Illumination."

Increase of life is called infelicity, the resting of the mind in the vitality of forms is called animality.

The corporeal begins to age as it nears its prime. This indeed is not the Tao. What is not the Tao soon ends.

He who is endowed with ample virtue may be comapred to an infant.

No venemous insects sting him;

Nor fierce beasts sieze him;

Nor birds of prey strike him;

His bones are frail, his sinews tender, but his grasp is strong.

He does not know the conjugation of male and female, and yet he has sexual development;

It means he is in the best vitality.

He may cry all day without growing hoarse;

It means that he is in the perfect harmony.

To know this harmony is to approach eternity.

To know eternity is to attain enlightenment.

To increase life is to lead to calamity.

To let the heart exert the breath is to become stark.

Abstruse Signs

The thickness of implicit virtuosity:

Compare it to a robust infant.

Bees, scorpions, serpents, and snakes do not sting.

Ferocious animals do not seize.

Birds of prey do not take.

Bones are weak and muscles soft and yet he has a firm grasp.

He does not yet know to join male and female and yet he is completely ready.

This is the instinct's having arrived.

The whole day he babbles and he does not get hoarse.

This is the balance having arrived.

Knowing to balance, call it 'constant'

Knowing how to stay constant, call it 'discernment.'

Benefiting life, call it 'auspicious.'

The heart-mind's deploying life-force, call it 'coercion.'

When natural kinds are mature then old age sets in.

Call this not guided.

That which is not guided is early already.

When man is enriched with Tê,

He may be identified with an innocent child.

He is free from the stings of insects,

Free from the claws of wild beasts,

Free from the attacks of devouring birds.

None of his bones or muscles are said to be strong,

But the grip of his hand is always firm.

Nothing concerning the union of male and female is yet known,

But potentiality is evident.

The essence of his life is perfect.

He can cry all the time without losing his voice.

His inner harmony is supreme.

To be aware of inner harmony is to abide with reality.

To abide with reality is to be enlightened.

However, to push life to the full leads to evil.

The mind forcing one's potential is artificial.

When things are artificial, they lead to decay.

This deviates from Tao.

That which deviates from Tao ends life soon.

He who cherishes deep virtue is comparable to a newborn baby.

Poisonous insects will not sting him.

Ferocious animals will not pounce upon him.

Predatory birds will not swoop down upon him.

His bones are weak and his muscles are soft.

He does not know of the union between male and female.

He has the highest spirit.

He can cry all day but never become hoarse.

He has perfect harmony.

He knows harmony as constancy.

He knows constancy as clarity.

To nourish the body with abundant food and clothing means to borrow the outer energy.

To command the 'chi' with the mind means to use force.

When reaching their prime, creatures begin to age.

He who tries to oppose this rule means to go against the Tao.

He who embodies abundant virtue

May be likened to a ruddy infant:

Wasps, venomous insects, scorpions, and snakes

Do not sting him;

Birds of prey and ferocious beasts

Do not seize him.

Bones weak, muscles soft,

Its grip is firm.

Knowing nothing about the copulation

Between female and male,

Its little penis erects,

Which manifests sublime virility;

It howls all day without becoming hoarse,

Which manifests sublime harmony.

Knowing harmony means constancy;

Knowing constancy means clear-sightedness.

Extravagant living means calamity;

The heart dominating the breath means collapse.

Something ages while still in its prime

Is contrary to the Tao.

What is contrary to the Tao perishes early.

What is sown by the best sower will never be uprooted,

What is fastened by the best fastener will never be loosened.

And so his children and grandchildren can continue the ancestral ritual for many generations.

If he nurtures the Tao by himself, his virtue is genuine,

If he nurtures the Tao in his family, his virtue is abundant,

If he nurtures the Tao in his village, his virtue is inestimable,

If he nurtures the Tao in his country, his virtue fills the country,

If he nurtures the Tao in the world, his virtue fills the universe.

Therefore, when you observe the individual, know individuals,

When you observe the family, know families,

When you observe the village, know villages,

When you observe the country, know countries,

When you observe the world, know the universe.

How do I know that it is possible to rule the world with the Tao?

From this observation.

One who possesses virtue in abundance is comparable to a new born babe:

Poisonous insects will not sting it;

Ferocious animals will not pounce on it;

Predatory birds will not swoop down on it.

Its bones are weak and its sinews supple yet its hold is firm.

It does not know the union of male and female yet its male member will stir:

This is because its virility is at its height.

It howls all day yet does not become hoarse:

This is because its harmony is at its height.

To know harmony is called the constant;

To know the constant is called discernment.

To try to add to one's vitality is called ill-omened;

For the mind to egg on the breath is called violent.

A
creature in its prime doing harm to the old

Is known as going against the way.

That which goes against the way will come to an early end.

The Signet of the Mysterious

He who possesses virtue in all its solidity is like unto a little child.

Venomous reptiles do not sting him, fierce beasts do not seize him. Birds of prey do not strike him. His bones are weak, his sinews tender, but his grasp is firm. He does not yet know the relation between male and female, but his virility is strong. Thus his metal grows to perfection. A whole day he might cry and sob without growing hoarse. This shows the perfection of his harmony.

To know the harmonious is called the eternal. To know the eternal is called enlightenment.

To increase life is called a blessing, and heart-directed vitality is called strength, but things vigorous are about to grow old and I call this un-Reason.

Un-Reason soon ceases!

The master's virtue is to be like a newborn child. Its connection to the physical body is weak, but its hold on the Tao is strong. Therefore it is free from all physical dangers. It hasn't been conditioned, so its energy is whole. At one with nature, it can scream all day and never becomes hoarse. If you follow the natural flow there will be no desire. Without desire there is no expectation. Without expectation there is no disappointment. Without disappointment there is serenity. In serenity abides the true breath, which is the gateway to enlightenment.

One possessing virtue may be compared to an infant.

Poisonous insects will not bite, ferocious animals will not pounce,

Fetching birds will not prey.

Though weak in bones and soft in muscles, his hold is firm;

Though ignorant of union, his instrument is turgid.

This is supreme energy.

Crying all day without turning hoarse, this is supreme harmony.

Knowing harmony is normalcy;

knowing normalcy is discernment.

Enriching oneself is ominous;

overexerting oneself is ruinous.

Matter withers after saturation;

This is not in line with Direction.

Not in line with Direction, early demise is the expectation.

Embody Integrity's abundance and you're like a vibrant child

hornets and vipers can't bite,

savage beasts can't maul and fierce birds can't claw,

bones supple and muscles tender, but still gripping firmly.

Knowing nothing of male and female mingling

and yet aroused:

this is the utmost essence.

Wailing all day without getting hoarse:

this is the utmost harmony.

To understand harmony is called constancy,

and to understand constancy is called enlightenment.

To enhance your life is called tempting fate,

and to control ch'i with the mind is called violence.

Things grown strong soon grow old.

This is called losing the Way: Lose the Way and you die young.

The abundant virtue of a person,

May be compared to that of an infant:

Poisonous insects do not sting him,

Wild beats do not grab him,

Birds of prey do not claw him.

Though he has weak bones and soft sinews, his grip is firm.

Despite his ignorance of union of male and female, his organ is often erect.

This demonstrates his highest essence.

He cries all day without becoming hoarse.

This shows his utmost harmony with Nature.

To know the harmony with Nature is to know the truth;

To know the truth is enlightenment.

Over indulging in life produces ill consequences,

Ceding control of vital energy to emotion leads to violence.

Everything decays after its prime.

These (over indulging, ceding control to emotion) would be counter to Tao,

Whoever acts counter to Tao spells his early demise.

Holding
the richness of the ideal in the mouth

Compares to relating to a newborn child.

Poisonous bugs are without stinging

Fierce animals are without grasping

Birds of prey are without pouncing.

There
are weak bones and yielding tendons, yet a firm grasp

The male does not yet know union with the female

Yet its virility is strong

It has essence even at the extreme.

Screaming all day yet without being hoarse

Harmonizing even at the extreme.

Knowing
harmony say entireness

Knowing entireness say luminous

In accord with giving birth say happy

The mind results in animus, say strong.

Things
reach the prime and then grow old?

What is called this is without tao.

What is without tao comes to an early end.

He who holds himself in perfect Virtue (without lust or anger) is like the new-born child whom the scorpion does not bite, the tiger does not devour, the vulture does not seize, whom all respect. A child's bones are weak, its tendons are feeble, but it grasps objects strongly (just as its soul and body are held together by force).

He has not yet any notion of the act of generation, And, in consequence, keeps his seminal virtue intact.

He cries softly all day long without becoming hoarse, so perfect is his peace. Peace makes for durability; he who understands this is enlightened.

Whereas any violent excitement, above all lust and anger, wears one out.

From this it follows that virility (which man abuses) is succeeded by decrepitude. Intense life is contrary to the Principle, And in consequence prematurely mortal.

Those who hold an abundance of virtue

Are similar to newborn infants

Poisonous insects do not sting them

Wild beasts do not claw them

Birds of prey do not attack them

Their bones are weak, tendons are soft

But their grasp is firm

They do not know of sexual union but can manifest arousal

Due to the optimum of essence

They can cry the whole day and yet not be hoarse

Due to the optimum of harmony

Knowing harmony is said to be constancy

Knowing constancy is said to be clarity

Excessive vitality is said to be inauspicious

Mind overusing energy is said to be aggressive

Things become strong and then grow old

This is called contrary to the Tao

That which is contrary to the Tao will soon perish

Tao cultivators wish to return to a purer and simpler state of mind. It is a state full of bliss and grace. We have all experienced it as infants, but have forgotten as we grew up and became more and more affected by the material world.

Infants are protected from danger. Someone who has cultivated much virtue and thus become more child-like is likewise protected. Just as infants are protected by their loving parents, virtuous cultivators are protected by the all-nurturing mother, the Tao. By following the Tao, they cannot be stung by poisonous insects of malicious gossip, clawed by the wild beasts of fear and anger, or attacked by the vicious birds of greed and envy.

Such virtuous cultivators may appear soft and yielding, and yet they have a firm handle on their goals and objectives. They are flexible in their approach, and unwavering in their determination.

They live life with energy and vitality. They possess the optimum essence of health, so that every day is exciting, fun, and creative. Just as babies cry all day without getting hoarse, they can concentrate on difficult tasks for an extended period of time without getting tired.

Their energy works in perfect harmony with their surroundings. This harmonious interaction arises from their constant purpose and sense of mission. They understand the meaning of life - why they are here and what they are here to do - and this clarity of vision powers their every thought and action.

They can endure the test of time because they never overdo anything. They do not cultivate physical vitality to excess, nor do they overtax the mind. If life is a race, then they are marathon runners, not sprinters. Sprinters may be able to surge forward in an explosive burst of speed, but within minutes their strength is depleted. Soon after, they collapse in a heap of exhaustion. It is inevitable and contrary to the lasting and enduring Tao of the true cultivators.

Notes

The ancient sages spoke of sexuality in an open and direct manner because they saw it as part of nature, and not something about which to feel shame or guilt. They see nothing "filthy" or "disgusting" about it. Instead, they acknowledge and utilize its vast creative powers.

TO VERIFY THE MYSTERIOUS

The essence of teh is comparable to the state of a young boy. Poisonous insects will not sting him, wild beasts will not seize him, birds of prey will not attack him. The bones are weak, the muscles are tender, it is true, but his grasp is firm.

He does not yet know the relation of the sexes, but he has perfect organs, nevertheless. His spirit is virile, indeed! He can sob and cry all day without becoming hoarse, his harmony (as a child) is perfect indeed!

To recognize this harmony (for growth) is to know the eternal'. To recognize the eternal is to know enlightenment. To increase life (to cause things to grow) is to know blessedness. To be conscious of an inner fecundity is strength. Things fully grown are about to decay, they are the opposite of Tao. The opposite of Tao soon ceases.

One who contains te in fullness,

Is to be compared to an infant.

Wasps, scorpions, and snakes do not bite it,

Fierce beasts do not attack it,

Birds of prey do not pounce upon it.

Its bones weak, its sinews tender,

But its grip is firm;

Knowing not the union of the female and male animals,

Yet its organ stirs.

Such is the perfection of its life-force (ching).

Crying all day, yet it does not get hoarse.

Such is the Perfection of its harmony (ho).

To know harmony is to know the everlasting (ch'ang);

To know the everlasting is to be illumined (ming).

To help life along is to bring ill portend;

To use mind (hsin) to direct the life breath (ch'i) is called the strong (ch'iang).

When things are full-grown they become old,

It is called not following the Way (Tao).

Not following the Way one dies early.

Whoever has Teh is like a child; poisonous insects will not bite; wild animals will not attack; predatory birds will not strike.

Bones soft and muscles weak but gripping strongly; unconcerned about sexual relations yet with vigor at its peak; crying out all day long but not hoarse. This involves perfect harmony. Knowing harmony is to approach the eternal. Knowing the eternal is to be enlightened.

To become excitable leads to confusion; to freely vent emotions is to be aggressive. Things reach their prime and then decline. To be impatient is to oppose Tao; whatever opposes Tao dies young.

Kapitel nicht vorhanden / chapter not available

Fifty-five

He who is filled with Virtue is like a newborn child.

Wasps and serpents will not sting him;

Wild beasts will not pounce upon him;

He will not be attacked by birds of prey.

His bones are soft, his muscles weak,

But his grip is firm.

He has not experienced the union of man and woman, but is whole.

His manhood is strong.

He screams all day without becoming hoarse.

This is perfect harmony.

Knowing harmony is constancy.

Knowing constancy is enlightenment.

It
is not wise to rush about.

Controlling the breath causes strain.

If too much energy is used, exhaustion follows.

This is not the way of Tao.

Whatever is contrary to Tao will not last long.

A man of prodigious virtue is just like a newly-born baby:

Poisonous insects will not sting it;

Beasts of prey will not harm it;

Birds of prey will not swoop down upon it.

Its bones and muscles are weak and supple,

Yet its hold is tight.

It does not know sexual intercourse between the male and female,

Yet its little penis often erects itself;

This is because it is at the height of virility.

It cries all day long,

Yet its throat does not become hoarse;

This is because it is at the height of harmonious vim and vigor.

To know harmony is to know the law of unity;

To know the law of unity is to know discernment;

To indulge in sensual pleasures is to look for disasters;

To let virility driven by desires is to give free rein to strength.

A creature in its prime is at the turning-point of being old,

For it is against the Tao.

What is against the Tao comes to an early end.

He who possesses Te in abundance

May be likened to a newborn baby.

Bees, scorpions and vipers do not sting it;

Ferocious beasts do not seize it;

Birds of prey do not attack it.

Its bones are weak and its sinews soft, yet its grip is firm.

It doesn't yet know the union of male and female, yet its organ is erect.

Its vital energy is perfect.

It screams all day yet never becomes hoarse.

Its harmony is perfect.

To know harmony is called [to know the] constant.

To know the constant is called enlightenment.

To improve upon one's life is called ill omen.

When the mind dictates the vital breath, it is called forcing.

When a thing reaches its prime, it becomes old.

Forcing is called contrary to Tao.

What is contrary to Tao expires early.

The person of great virtue is akin to an infant.

Poison snakes and insects will not bite him.

Ferocious animals will not harm him.

Birds of prey will not attack him.

The infant is weak and floppy,

But his grip is firm and tight.

Although he does not knows anything about copulation,

He has a strong erection and this signifies the pinnacle of vitality.

He can scream all day without suffering from hoarseness.

This epitomises that his vital energy is in harmony.

When the energy is harmonised, it is acting in accord with Dao.

If you understand the way of Dao, you have transcendental wisdom.

Overindulgence in life is harmful.

Forcing the body to work beyond its limits is excessive.

Whenever anything reaches its peak, it then begins to decline.

Action that is unnatural is contrary to Dao.

Action contrary to Dao will lead to an early demise.

The Mystic Charm

Hsuan Fu

He who is profoundly endowed with virtue

May be compared to an infant.

Poisonous insects do not sting him;

Wild beasts do not seize hold of him;

Birds of prey do not pounce upon him.

Weak in bone and soft in sinews,

He yet has a firm grip.

Though ignorant of intercourse between the sexes,

His genital organ is yet firm and strong,

Indicating the plenitude of his vital essence.

He may scream all day,

Yet his voice does not become hoarse,

Indicating the plenitude of his inner harmony.

To know harmony is to accord with the Immutable;

To accord with the Immutable means enlightenment.

Improvement in health is a good omen;

Mental control of the breath means strength.

Things begin to decay after reaching the prime.

Decay indicates disregard of Tao.

Whatever disregards Tao soon vanishes.

The man who is endowed in full measure with the spiritual power of harmlessness may be compared to a child.

Venomous insects do not sting him,

Nor savage beasts assail him;

Birds of prey leave him unharmed.

His bones are soft and his sinews are weak,

But his grip is firm and sure.

Though inocent of sexual union, yet he is fully formed,

And thus is his vitality unimpaired.

Though he cry all day long, his voice does not grow harsh;

His functioning is perfectly harmonious.

To know such harmony as this is to be aware of the Never-changing;

To be aware of the Never-changing is to know Illumination.

But to lust after greater fullness of life is to invite calamities.

For if desire plays the tyrant over the life-breath, hardening sets it.

When vigour reaches its climax, shall not decay ensue?

Such forcing is against the Tao.

And that which is against the Tao quickly passes away.

One who is weighty in virtue

Resembles an infant child.

Poisonous insects don't sting him;

Wild beasts don't seize him;

Birds of prey don't strike him.

His bones are soft,

His sinews tender,

Yet his grip is strong.

He does not know

The union of male and female,

Yet his vitality is evident,

His vitality perfect.

He cries and howls all day,

But does not get hoarse.

His harmony is perfect indeed!

To know harmony

Is to know the changeless.

To now the changeless

Is to have insight.

It is ominous to improve on life,

Injurious to control breathing by the mind:

Things overgrown fall into decay.

That is not-Tao,

And what is not-Tao soon ends.

One who is steeped in natural virtue is akin to a newborn babe.

Wasps and poisonous serpents do not sting it.

Fierce beasts do not seize it.

Birds of prey do not maul it.

Its bones are tender, its muscles soft, yet its grip is firm.

It has not known the union of male and female, yet its male member will stir naturally.

This is because its vitality is perfectly whole.

It can howl and scream all day long without becoming hoarse.

This is because it embodies perfect harmony.

To know harmony is to know natural virtue.

To recognize the natural virtue of the universe is to have insight.

To overprotect one's life is to invite danger.

To follow the fantasy of the mind is to drain away one's life energy.

To hasten growth is to hasten decay.

All of this is against the Way of natural virtue.

Whatever is against the Universal Way of life soon ceases to be.

LV.

The
Mysterious Talisman

Who
has abundantly the attributes

(Of
Tao) an infant child is like,

Poisonous
insects will not sting, wild beasts

Not
seize, and birds of prey not strike.

His
bones are tender and the sinews weak,

Yet
firmly grasp, the sexual

Unconscious
sleeps, and yet it still is there,

A
perfect spirit physical,

With
throat unharmed he cries the whole day long,

Each
perfect part is linked with all.

To
know this harmony is called eternal;

To
know the eternal, this is called

Brightness
supernal.

Increase
of life is blessedness, they say,

They
call the heart-directed spirit strength,

But
these things reach their fullest growth, at length,

And
plunge to swift decay;

We
call all this contrary to the Tao,

Whatever
is contrary to the Tao

Soon will pass away.

He who has his foundation in Teh is like a little child.

Poisonous insects do not sting him, Wild beasts do not seize him, Birds of prey do not strike at him.

His bones are weak, his muscles soft, Yet he can take hold firmly.

He is ignorant of sex, but is full of vitality.

He will grow to maturity.

All day long he shouts and sings.

He will arrive at a knowledge of harmony.

The knowledge of harmony is called eternal.

The knowledge of eternal things is called clear vision.

Increase of life does not always bring happiness.

The life-force that gives birth to human emotion is strong.

Human emotion comes to full power and then grows old.

It is not Tao.

If it is not Tao, it will quickly perish.

One who is high in Virtue (Power)

is like the new-born babe.

Wasps and poisonous snakes don't sting,

Murderous beasts do not seize,

Birds who hunt do not beat,

Its bones are flexible, its muscles relaxed,

Its grip is strong.

It does not know the sex,

Growing in its wholeness,

and keeping its spirit

in its Life Force is at its greatest.

It screams

all day long

without getting hoarse,

Because of its perfect harmony.

To know harmony

is to know the Changeless.

To know the Changeless

is to have understanding.

To hurry the growth of life

is dangerous.

To control the breath by choice

is to over force it.

To be overgrown is to rot.

This is against Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

Whatever is

against Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

soon ceases to be.

The plenitude of one who contains Virtue within himself, may be likened to that of an infant.

Poisonous insects will not sting it, fierce beasts will not seize it, nor will birds of prey claw it. Though its bones are weak and its sinews soft, it has a firm grip. Though it knows not yet of the union of male and female, its male member will stir. This is because the fine essence (in it) has attained the utmost (potency). Though it may scream all day long, its voice will not become hoarse. This is because the natural harmony (in it) has attained the utmost (potency).

To understand the natural harmony means being constant.

To understand being constant means being enlightened.

To increase life means inviting evil.

To control the vital breath with the mind means rigidity.

When things have matured they age. (Such control) is contrary to the Way. What is contrary to the Way will soon end.

He who has in himself abundantly the attributes (of the Tao) is

like an infant. Poisonous insects will not sting him; fierce beasts

will not seize him; birds of prey will not strike him.

(The
infant's) bones are weak and its sinews soft, but yet its

grasp is firm. It knows not yet the union of male and female, and yet

its virile member may be excited;--showing the perfection of its

physical essence. All day long it will cry without its throat

becoming hoarse;--showing the harmony (in its constitution).

To
him by whom this harmony is known,

(The secret of) the unchanging (Tao) is shown,

And in the knowledge wisdom finds its throne.

All life-increasing arts to evil turn;

Where the mind makes the vital breath to burn,

(False) is the strength, (and o'er it we should mourn.)

When
things have become strong, they (then) become old, which may

be said to be contrary to the Tao. Whatever is contrary to the Tao

soon ends.

One who fully embodies DEI is like a ruddy infant.
Wasps,
spiders, scorpions and snakes
do not sting or bite them;
Rapacious birds
and fierce beasts
do not seize them.
Their
bones are weak and their sinews, soft
yet their grip is tight.
They
have not known the joining of male and female,
yet they are sexually aroused!

Their Libido is at it's peak.
They
can scream all day long without becoming hoarse;
Their harmony has reached
it's perfection.
Striving
to increase one's life is ominous;
to control one's vital breath with the
mind entails force.
Something
that grows old in it's prime
is said to not be in accord with the Path.

Not being in accord with the Path leads to an early demise.

One
who sees full emptiness

Is like a child just born

With muscles weak and bones so soft

Yet with a grip that's strong

The
newborn hasn't been fulfilled

Its nature is pure vacancy

Nullity and nothingness

And potent spontaneity

It
can scream and cry all day

And yet it never does get hoarse

It only does what naturally

Emerges from the inner source

To
see this inner nature

Is seeing in a way that's bold

Into the only place there is

That cannot possibly grow old

ONE who is steeped in Virtue is akin to the new-born babe.

Wasps and poisonous serpents do not sting it,

Nor fierce beasts seize it,

Nor birds of prey maul it.

Its bones are tender, its sinews soft,

But its grip is firm.

It has not known the union of the male and the female,

Growing in its wholeness, and keeping its vitality in its perfect integrity.

It howls and screams all day long without getting hoarse,

Because it embodies perfect harmony.

To know harmony is to know the Changeless.

To know the Changeless is to have insight.

To hasten the growth of life is ominous.

To control the breath by the will is to overstrain it.

To be overgrown is to decay.

All this is against Tao,

And whatever is against Tao soon ceases to be.

One who is abundant in virtue is much like a newborn child; bees, scorpions and snakes will not sting or bite such a one.

Wild beasts will not sink claws into the infant, nor will birds of prey strike a blow.

Though his bones be soft, and his sinews be weak, his grip will be strong.

The infant doesn't yet know of the union between male and female,

yet this one is perfectly formed, the ultimate in vitality.

Babbling and screaming all day, he does not become hoarse; this shows the harmony of the infant.

To know virtue and harmony like this, to keep it constant, this is illumination.

To try to force life: this bodes ill. To try to exceed nature brings calamity. To try to control nature brings violence.

And things that are over luxurious, overgrown and extremely fecund are not in keeping with the Tao. These things will wither and perish.

One who is filled with the Tao

is like a newborn child.

The infant is protected from

the stinging insects, wild beasts, and birds of prey.

Its bones are soft, its muscles are weak,

but its grip is firm and strong.

It doesn't know about the union

of male and female,

yet his penis can stand erect,

because of the power of life within him.

It can cry all day and never become hoarse.

This is perfect harmony.

To
understand harmony is to understand the Constant.

To know the Constant is to be called 'enlightened'.

To unnaturally try to extend life is not appropriate.

To try and alter the life-breath is unnatural.

The master understands that when something reaches its prime

it will soon begin to decline.

Changing the natural is against the way of the Tao.

Those who do it will come to an early end.

People who surrender all their blocks and conflicts experience a free flow of vital energy.

They look as radiant as a baby, and they employ a childlike immunity to injury. Bugs don't bite them. Dogs don't attack them. Trouble-makers leave them alone.

Their bodies seem relaxed and pliant, but their stamina and strength are remarkable. They are sexually moving without being overly erotic. They can sing or even yell for a long time and never get hoarse.

It is as if they were newly in love, not with one person, but with all creation, and their energies are as abundant as all creation.

It is a mistake to confuse excitement or arousal with the vital flow of enlightenment. Stimulants and emotional adventures arouse people, but such arousal does not enhance one's energies. On the contrary, excitement spends energy and exhausts vitality.

Think of excitement as tension that comes when stimulation meets resistance. The exciting experience ends when the stimulation stops or when a person wears out.

But the vitality of enlightenment is a continuous flow. It meets no resistance and goes on and on without stress.

Excitement is rooted in passing desires. Vital energy springs from the eternal.

One who is filled with goodness is like a freshly-born infant.

Wasps, scorpions and snakes will not bite her.

Wild beasts will not attack her, nor will birds of prey pounce on her.

Her bones may be fragile and her skin soft,

But her grasp is firm.

She does not recognize the union of male and female

For she knows it only as an undivided whole.

This is the essence of perfection.

She can how All day and not get hoarse.

This is perfect harmony.

Knowing harmony is faithfulness.

Knowing faithfulness is salvation.

Trying to extend one's life-span is dangerous and unnatural.

To manipulate one's energy with the mind is a powerfu thing

But whoever possesses such strength invariably grows old and withers.

This is not the way of the Tao.

All those who do not follow the Tao will come to an early end.

A
person who flows in peace and harmony

is like a newborn baby.

Poisonous insects and reptiles do not sting or

bite it.

Wild animals do not stalk it.

Raptors do not attack it.

Its
bones are soft and it muscles are weak

yet its grip is secure.

It is not aware of male and female

yet its genitals are aroused.

Its oneness is perfect.

It screams all day without becoming hoarse.

This is the perfection of harmony.

Knowing
harmony is acknowledging

the oneness of Infinity.

Knowing the oneness of Infinity is the

experience of peace.

Manipulating
one's life force results in confusion.

Controlling the breath interrupts the harmony of

the body.

Increasing the natural pace of life creates

exhaustion

and is therefore not the path of harmony.

Anything
that remains out of harmony is short

lived.

One who has great Virtue is like a new-born child.

Wasps, scorpions and cobra snakes will not bite him.

Fearsome beasts will not take him.

Raptors will not attack him.

His bones are soft, his muscles are weak, but his grip is firm.

He knows nothing of physical love and yet stands complete; his Essence is

strong.

He cries aloud all day without growing hoarse, because he is at Peace.

To always know Peace, to always be Open, is an Omen of Long Life.

The Heart that grows Angry becomes Strong.

Strong things only decline.

That is not the Way,

and what is not the Way will soon end.

He who possesses Virtue in abundance is like a newly born infant.

Poisonous insects will not sting him;

Wild beasts will not seize him;

Birds of prey will not attack him.

His bones are soft, his muscles weak, but his grasp is strong.

He has not experienced the union of male and female,

And yet is fully virile:

His essence is complete.

He can cry all day without getting hoarse.

This is harmony at its height.

Knowing harmony is to know what is eternal.

Knowing what is eternal is to be enlightened.

It is inauspicious to try to improve on life,

And harmful to regulate breathing by conscious control.

To strive for too much results in exhaustion.

These actions are contrary to Tao.

And what is contrary to Tao soon comes to an early end.

The truest being can be illustrated by the infant.

Infants are not attacked by poisonous insects

Or by the birds and beasts of prey.

Though they are weak and fragile,

They have a firm grasp.

Though they don't know about sexual intercourse,

The male penises can naturally erect

(Which is the best embodiment of energy).

Though they can cry the whole day,

Their voices never crack

(Which is the best function of harmony).

Keeping harmony is keeping eternity.

The keeper of eternity can attain true wisdom.

Exertion of will beyond harmony is strength.

What is strong will soon weaken,

What is weakening is against the Way.

What is against the Way will die early.

One who has an abundance of Te is like a newborn child: Poisonous bugs will not bite it fierce beasts will not snatch it birds of prey will not attack it. Its bones are Soft, its sinews Weak, but its grip is firm.

It has not known the union of man and woman, but its organs get aroused: Vital energy at its height.

It will scream all day without getting hoarse: Harmony at its height. To experience Harmony is called being Steady to experience Steadiness is called Clarity.

'Increasing life': ominous 'the mind controlling the ch'i': forcing.

Things are vigorous, then grow old: A case of 'not-Tao'. Not-Tao, soon gone.

He who lives in Mergence with Great Te is pure like a newborn baby. Poisonous insects do not sting him; snakes do not bite him; wild animals and birds do not attack him. He refined the consciousness and is firmly merged with Tao.

He evaluates people not by the feature of sex or other outer qualities but look at their essence: at the soul.

He also perceives others as integral parts of the Whole*, in Unity.

And He possesses the ability to initiate in people the spiritual growth.

He can preach all day long, and his voice remains strong: He stays in constant Mergence with Tao!

In this way, He lives life in happiness!

Common people, having reached the prime of life, immediately begin to fade in old age... It happens so because they do not achieve Mergence with Tao.

He who follows the Tao Way is like a child.

He looks weak, but his pressure if firm.

He looks without power, but his movement is energetic.

He looks like has nothing to say,

But his words come always at the right time.

The
Wise One is always in harmony,

Thus he is always in tone with the universe,

Being in tone with the universe he shines always.

One
possessing the fullness of virtue may be compared to a newborn baby. Hornets,
scorpions, vipers, and snakes cannot sting [the newborn baby]. The fierce beasts
do not pounce upon it. The raptors do not sink their talons into it. The baby's
bones are pliant, his muscles weak, yet his grip is firm. He has never known
the coupling of male and female, yet has a full erection. That is the height
of vitality. He cries the entire day yet does not become hoarse. That is the
perfection of harmony. To know harmony is said to be constant. To know constancy
is said to be enlightenment. To augment life is said to be inauspicious. For
the heart and mind to exert compulsion on the lifebreath is said to be forcing
things. When creatures come to their prime they begin to age. That is spoken
of as the dao (course) of retrograde action. What is on the retrograde dao is
soon finished.

Maintaining an abundance of virtue is comparable to being an infant.

Poisonous insects will not sting;

Ferocious beasts will not seize;

Predatory birds will not pounce;

The bones are tender, the sinews are soft, but the grasp is firm.

Not knowing the union of male and female,

The organ is fully formed;

This is the zenith of essence.

Howling and screaming all day without getting hoarse;

This is the zenith of harmony.

To know harmony means to be constant;

To know constancy means enlightenment;

To benefit one's own life is ill-fated.

To let one's heart direct vigor is to become stark.

Things in their prime will become old;

This is not Tao.

Being not Tao means to die early.

The Power in Not Contending

To possess Power that runs deep

Is to be like a newborn child.

Poisonous insects do not sting it,

Fierce beasts do not seize it,

Birds of prey do not strike it.

Its bones are yielding,

Its muscles are relaxed,

Its grip is strong.

It does not yet know the union of male and female,

Yet its virility is active.

Its Life Force is at its greatest.

It can scream all day,

Yet it does not become hoarse.

Its Harmony is at its greatest.

To know Harmony is called the Absolute.

To know the Absolute is called insight.

To enhance life is called propitious.

To be conscious of Influence is called strength.

Things overgrown must decline.

This is not the Tao.

What is not the Tao will soon end.

Do you want the secret of an old age? Do not let yourself become disappointed. Be as effortless as a floating cloud. Go where the winds will take you. Expect nothing. Never be disappointed. Grow old.

Rich in virtue, like an infant,

Noxious insects will not sting him;

Wild beasts will not attack his flesh

Nor birds of prey sink claws in him.

His
bones are soft, his sinews weak,

His grip is nonetheless robust;

Of sexual union unaware,

His organs all completely formed,

His vital force is at its height.

He shouts all day, does not get hoarse:

His person is a harmony.

Harmony
experienced is known as constancy;

Constancy experienced is called enlightenment;

Exuberant vitality is ominous, they say;

A bent for vehemence is called aggressiveness.

That
things with age decline in strength,

You well may say, suits not the Way;

And not to suit the Way is early death.

The profundity of De contained should be compared to an ignorant infant without desires,

Whom poisonous insects will not sting,

Whom fierce brutes will not seize,

Whom birds of prey will not attack;

Whose bones are weak and whose sinews are soft, but whose grasp is firm;

Who does not yet know about intercourse of male and female but whose virile member may be excited, because it is full of physical essence;

Who cries all day long without its throat becoming hoarse, because it is peaceful and without desires.

To know the peace is called the eternal,

To know the eternal is called wisdom.

The desire for life enjoyment is a disaster,

And to subject physical essence to desire is to boast of powerfulness.

Things begin to become old when they have grown strong, which may be said to be contrary to Tao.

Contrariness to Tao brings death with it very soon.

One who has profoundly internalized virtue is comparable to the infant.

Wasps, scorpions, adders, and vipers do not sting or bite him.

Fierce animals do not attack him.

Birds of prey do not seize him.

His bones are soft and sinews pliant, but his grip is firm.

That he is ignorant of the union of male and female yet completely erect

Is because his semen is at the full.

That he can cry all day long yet never grow hoarse

Is because his bodily balance is perfect.

To know how to maintain balance is called "constancy."

To understand constancy is called "perspicacity."

To extend life beyond its natural span is called "inauspicious."

For the heart/mind to control the vital force is called "forcing strength."

Once a thing reaches its prime, it grows old.

We say it goes against the Dao, and what is against the Dao comes to an early end.

1. One who embraces the fullness of Virtue,

2. Can be compared to a newborn babe.

3. Wasps and scorpions, snakes and vipers do not sting him;

4. Birds of prey and fierce beasts do not seize him;

5. His bones and muscles are weak and pliant, yet his grasp is firm;

6. He does not yet know the meeting of male and female, yet his organ is aroused—

7. This is because his essence is at its height.

8. He can scream all day, yet he won't become hoarse—

9. This is because his harmony is at its height.

10.
To know harmony is called "the constant";

11. To know the constant is called "being wise";

12. To add on to life is called a "bad omen";

13. For the mind to control the breath—that's called "forcing things."

14.
When things reach their prime they get old;

15. This is called "not the Way."

16. What is not the Way will come to an early end.

A person filled
with the power of Tao

is like a baby boy:

bees can't sting him,

wild beasts can't attack him.

A baby has soft
bones

and weak muscles,

but a firm grip.

He hasn't had sex,

but he can get an erection.

That's because he's got lots of energy.

He can cry all day

and never lose his voice.

That's because he's at one with his world.

If you're at
one with the world,

you know constancy.

And if you know constancy,

you've been enlightened.

It's not healthy

to try to prolong your life.

It's unnatural to impose the mind's will

upon the body.

People waste time and energy

trying to be strong or beautiful,

and their strength and beauty fade.

They've lost touch with Tao,

and when you lose touch with Tao,

you might as well be dead.

.

Know Harmony

Those filled with power are like new-born children.

Poisonous insects will not sting them;

ferocious beasts will not pounce upon them;

predatory birds will not swoop down on them.

Their bones are pliable, their muscles tender,

but their grip is firm.

They have never known the union of man and woman,

but the organ is fully formed,

meaning that the vital essence is strong.

They may cry all day without getting hoarse,

meaning that the harmony is perfect.

To know harmony is to be in accord with the eternal.

To know the eternal is to be enlightened.

To try to force life is ominous.

To force the vital essence with the mind is violence.

The prime is past, and decay follows,

meaning that it is contrary to the Way.

Whatever is contrary to the Way will soon perish.

One who is rich is Teh is like a child.

Insects and snakes wild beasts and birds of prey do not harm him.

His bones are weak his sinews tender but his grip is firm.

Unaware of his sex he nevertheless unfolds his creative power.

Constantly crying and babbling he does not get hoarse for he is one with himself.

To know of one's at-one-ness is being one with the Eternal.

To be one with the Eternal is to be enlightened.

Enjoying life is delusive happiness of separate existence.

Exhausting one's vital powers is delusive strength.

Delusive power of separate existence vanishes soon and decays since it is without All-Being without Tao.

What is Taoless has no duration.

The Character of The Child

Lao Tze says,

He who has in himself abundant Teh, the attribute of the Tao, is like a baby.

Poisonous insects will not sting him;

fierce beasts will not seize him;

and birds of prey will not pounce upon him.

A baby is weak with tender bones and feeble sinews, but his grasp is firm and tight.

He doesn't know men and women's affairs, yet his virile member may be excited, showing the perfection of his vigor.

He cries all day long without his throat becoming hoarse, thus showing the perfection of his harmonious constitution.

When one knows harmony, he knows the absolute.

When he knows the absolute, he deserves to be called the enlightened.

But he who knows the life-increasing arts transforms himself by having an evil heart.

He who lets his emotions go through impulse is called strong.

When things become strong in maturity, they become old,

which may be said to be contrary to the Tao.

Whatever is contrary to the Tao ends soon.

MYSTERIOUS VIRTUE

He
who has virtue is like a newborn child,

free from attack by those who dwell

in the way of nature, the way of the Tao.

The
bones of the newborn child are soft,

his muscles supple, but his grip is firm;

he is whole, though not knowing he was born

of the creative and receptive way.

The way of nature is in the child,

so even when he shouts all day,

his throat does not grow hoarse or dry.

From
constancy, there develops harmony,

and from harmony, enlightenment.

It
is unwise to rush from here to there.

To hold one's breath causes the body strain;

exhaustion follows

when too much energy is used,

for this is not the natural way.

He
who is in opposition to the Tao

does not live his natural years.

He who is in harmony with the Tao

is like a newborn child.

Its bones are soft, its muscles are weak,

but its grip is powerful.

It doesn't know about the union

of male and female,

yet its penis can stand erect,

so intense is its vital power.

It can scream its head off all day,

yet it never becomes hoarse,

so complete is its harmony.

The Master's power is like this.

He lets all things come and go

effortlessly, without desire.

He never expects results;

thus he is never disappointed.

He is never disappointed;

thus his spirit never grows old.

The inherited abundance of tender virtues is comparable to a new-born baby:

the poisonous insects may not sting him;

the fierce animals may not touch him;

and birds of prey may not snatch him.

His bones are soft and his muscles are tender, yet, he can hold firm.

It is like an infant who has the organ of reproduction but does not know its function.

This is the perfection of natural vitality.

It is like an infant who cries all day without growing hoarse.

This is the perfection of natural harmony.

To comprehend this harmony is to know the eternal function of Dao.

One who knows the eternities is enlightened.

One who overdoes his living is unlucky.

One whose will overcomes his temper is strong.

A matured living body will soon grow old.

These are called "the aberration of Dao".

The aberration of Dao leads to early extinction.

Action in its profundity is like a newborn baby.

Poisonous insects and venomous snakes do not sting it.

Predatory birds and ferocious animals do not seize it.

Its bones are soft and its sinews supple, yet its grasp is firm;

Without knowing the union of male and female, its organs become aroused.

Its vital essence comes to the point;

Crying all day, its voice never becomes hoarse.

Its harmony comes to the point.

Harmony is eternal.

Knowing harmony is discernment.

Enhancing life is equanimity.

Generating vitality through mind is strength.

When things reach their climax, they are suddenly old.

This is "Non-Tao."

"Non-Tao" dies young.

LV

One
who embraces virtue in its fullest

Is like a newborn babe

She has no fear of wasps and scorpions, or snakes and vipers

Birds of prey and fierce beasts mean nothing to him

Her bones and muscles are soft, but her grip is firm

Because his essence is at its height he can become aroused

Though he knows nothing of sex

Because her harmony is at its height she will not become hoarse

Though she screams all day

Harmony
is the path of wisdom

But you can't reach it be getting more

You can try to breathe more, but what sense is in that?

Eventually your breath will return to what it is

If
you look for more, you'll get as much as you can

And after that you'll just get old

An easy way to an early end

The Richness of Subliminal Virtue

The richness of subliminal virtue

is comparable to an infant:

poisonous creatures do not sting it,

wild beasts do not claw it,

predatory birds do not grab it.

Its tendons are flexible,

yet its grip is firm.

Even while it knows not of the mating of male and female,

its genitals get aroused;

this is the epitome of vitality.

It can cry all day without choking or getting hoarse;

this is the epitome of harmony.

Knowing harmony is called constancy,

knowing constancy is called clarity;

enhancing life is called propitious,

the mind mastering energy is called strong.

When beings climax in power, they wane;

this is called being unguided.

The unguided die early.

People with profound Te are like babies.

Poisonous insects cannot bite them.

Ferocious beasts cannot grab them.

Birds of prey cannot pounce on them.

With tough bones and flexible muscles they can hold firmly.

Without knowing male and female union, sexual organs can function, because the hormone comes into play.

They can cry a whole day without getting hoarse, because harmony comes into play.

Knowing harmony is called normalcy.

Knowing normalcy is called wisdom.

Fortifying oneself is ominous.

Things become old while still in their golden time.

This does not conform to Tao.

Departing from Tao leads to a premature end.

One who is enriched with Virtue is like the new-born babe.

Wasps and poisonous serpents do not sting him.

Nor fierce beasts seize him, nor birds of prey maul him.

His bones are tender, his sinews soft, but his grip is firm.

He has not known the union of the male and the female, but he grows in his wholeness, and his spirit is at its highest point.

He screams all day long without getting hoarse, because he embodies supreme harmony.

To know harmony is to be constant.

To know the constant is to have insight.

To hasten life is harmful.

To use the belly to direct the ether is to suppress it.

Things become big, thus they will be old soon.

That is against the Way.

To be against the Way is to die soon.

Use new born to see the value of great Virtue (Teh).

Wasps and serpents will not sting him;

wild beasts will not pounce upon him;

he will not be attacked by birds of prey.

His bones are soft, his muscles weak,

but his grip is firm.

He has not experienced the union of man and woman, is a whole,

an unbroken whole, the purest jing (pure substance).

He screams all day without becoming hoarse.

This is perfect harmony (without lost any semen).

Knowing how to reach harmony, can preserve.

Knowing how to preserve, is enlightenment.

Preserving produces good omen.

Desire (ejaculation) makes you potent.

Potency ensures aging (decay).

This is not Tao.

Not-Tao causes early death.

A person who is filled with Virtue

is like a newborn child.

Poisonons insects will not sting,

wild animals will not pounce,

birds of prey will not swoop down.

Although bones are soft and sinews weak,

a child's grip is firm.

The union of man and woman is not known,

yet there is completeness,

because a child's vital force is at its height.

Crying all day will not produce hoarseness,

because there is perfect harmony.

To
know harmony is to know the Always-so.

To know the Always-so is to be awakened.

Trying
to fill life to the brim invites a curse.

For the mind to Inake demands upon the breath of life

brings strain.

Whatever
has been forced to a peak of vigor

approaches its decay.

This is not the way of Tao.

And that which goes against the Tao

will quickly pass away.

Persons
that follow the way are like

a baby that

bees and mosquitoes do not sting

dogs and cats do not bite

birds do not peck.

Soft bones, weak muscles, strong grip

no need of sex, but perfectly formed by it.

Baby lives completely

screaming all day without becoming hoarse

Its needs fulfilled

it sleeps in perfect harmony.

To understand this harmony

is to understand the universe;

to understand the universe

is enlightenment.

Filling
one's life with busyness is to invite

disaster,

pushing oneself to the edge

exhausts,

for every effort

there is a loss.

This
is not the way

and what is not the way

will soon die away.

He who has a lot of mystic might also should be strong in secret able influence-might
- quite free from getting harmed, at times like a tender child: full of childlike
virtue at its best.

Then no poisonous insects should sting him. Fierce beasts should not seize him
and wild beasts hardly attack him, clawing birds of prey should not pounce on
and harass him.

The bones of this dear little one are soft and tender, his sinews tender, but
his grip is quite firm.

He hardly yet knows about the union of male and female, yet his organs are fully
formed and well, at times aroused. This means that his essence is at its height
there and then, or means that the vital force is at its height. [It could be
both.]

Such a one can cry all day without getting hoarse if his [libido as natural
balance] is whole and healthy [for it]. If so it's well in accord with something
eternal.

Now, to know eternity full well can be a discerning matter. To know bland harmony
likewise implies to be in eternity, or if missed, it is to understand some [principle
of] always-so by some degree of mental illumination. But to be well in accord
with the eternal means to be free as a bird.

To
fill life to the brim is to invite ugly portents, bad omens. To force the growth
of life likewise spells ills. Some ready at hand or to come later on, maybe.
Now, if the heart makes calls upon the life-breath, laziness or [yogic] rigidity
can follow suit.

After things reach their prime, they begin to grow old, Whatever has a time
of vigour also has a time of decay. Certain things age after reaching their
prime.

Much is contrary to dao. Whatever is contrary to dao will soon perish. He who
is against dao can perish rather young. Whats against dao could soon be destroyed.

He who embodies the fullness of integrity is like a ruddy infant.

Wasps, spiders, scorpions, and snakes will not sting or bite him;

Rapacious birds and fierce beasts will not seize him.

His bones are weak and his sinews soft, yet his grip is tight.

He knows not the joining of male and female, yet his penis is aroused.

His essence has reached a peak.

He screams the whole day without becoming hoarse;

His harmony has reached perfection.

Harmony implies constancy;

Constancy requires insight.

Striving to increase one's life is ominous;

To control the vital breath with one's mind entails force.

Something that grows old while still in its prime is said to be not in accord with the Way;

Not being in accord with the Way leads to an early demise.

The man who is saturated with Virtue is like a little child.

Scorpions will not sting him, wild beasts will not seize him, nor will birds of prey pluck at him.

His young bones are not hard, neither are his sinews strong, yet his grasp is firm and sure.

He is full of vitality, though unconscious of his sex.

Though he should cry out all day, yet he is never hoarse.

Herein is shown his harmony with Nature.

The knowledge of this harmony is the eternal Tao.

The knowledge of the eternal Tao is illumination.

Habits of excess grow upon a man, and the mind, giving way to the passions, they increase day by day.

And when the passions have reached their climax, they fall.

This is against the nature of Tao.

And what is contrary to Tao soon comes to an end.

Forever Young

If you accept each other exactly as you are,

you will not be disappointed

and your souls will remain young and fresh

If you don't set your hearts on any one result,

you will not be frustrated by events

and your love will remain strong and vital.

If you welcome events as they come

you will not be anxious about the future

and your relationship will remain supple and alive.

You have seen couples

for whom despair and frustration

have become a way of life.

They sleep-walk through their days

blaming, complaining, and dying.

You have also seen those

whose aging life together

has brought softness, gentleness and wisdom.

Which are the two of you becoming?

He who possesses virtue in abundance May be compared to an infant.
Poisonous insects will not sting him. Fierce beasts will not seize him.
Birds of prey will not strike him. His bones are weak, his sinews
tender, but his grasp is firm.

He does not yet know the union of male and female, But his organ is aroused, This means that his essence is at its height.

He may cry all day without becoming hoarse, This means that his
(natural) harmony is perfect. To know harmony means to be in accord with
the eternal. To be in accord with the eternal means to be enlightened.

To force the growth of life means ill omen. For the mind to employ the vital force without restraint means violence.

After all things reach their prime, they begin to grow old, Which
means being contrary to Tao. Whatever is contrary to Tao will soon
perish.

He whom life
fulfills,

Though he remains a child,

Is immune to the poisonous sting

Of insects, to the ravening

Of wild beasts or to vultures' bills.

He needs no more bone or muscle than a baby's for sure hold.

Without thought of joined organs, he is gender

Which grows firm, unfaltering.

Though his voice should cry out at full pitch all day, it would not rasp but
would stay tender

Through the perfect balancing

Of a man at endless ease with everything

Because of the true life that he has led.

To try for more than this bodes ill.

It is said, 'there's a way where there's a will;'

But let life ripen and then fall.

Willis not the way at all:

Deny the way of life and you are dead.

The people who have the thickest DE are like a naked newborn boy.

The snake does not sting him, the wild animal does not bite him, and the fierce bird does not claw him.

His bones are soft and his muscles are weak, but his grip is very strong.

He has no idea of making love, but his manhood is always rigid,

Because his body is in the purest state.

He cries all day, but does not go hoarse,

Because his body is in the most harmonic state.

Understanding this harmonic state makes you natural,

Understanding the natural way makes your mind clear.

Trying hard to make your life last longer only brings you bad luck,

Trying to be strong-willed against nature only makes you lifeless.

When things become strong, they start to break down,

Which is not in accordance with the DAO.

Not being in accordance with the DAO leads to an early death.

He who embodies the fullness of the Tao is like a ruddy infant.

No poisonous wasps will sting him.

No fierce beasts will seize him.

No rapacious birds will maul him.

His bones are tender and muscles soft,

Yet his grip is tight.

He knows not of the union of male and female,

Yet, filled with vitality,

His manhood becomes vigorously erect.

He can howl all day without becoming hoarse,

Because he is the embodiment of perfect balance.

To know balance is to know the eternal.

To know the eternal is to be illumined.

To overprotect life is to invite sure disaster.

To overuse the mind is to invite lopsided strength.

To overdevelop a thing is to invite early decay.

All are out of balance, and thus contrary to the Tao.

Being contrary to the Tao, things soon cease to be.

The truest being can be illustrated by the infant.

Infants are not attacked by poisonous insects

Or by the birds and beasts of prey.

Though they are weak and fragile,

They have a firm grasp.

Though they don't know about sexual intercourse,

The male penises can naturally erect

(Which is the best embodiment of energy).

Though they can cry the whole day,

Their voices never crack

(Which is the best function of harmony).

Keeping harmony is keeping eternity.

The keeper of eternity can attain true wisdom.

Exertion of will beyond harmony is strength.

What is strong will soon weaken,

What is weakening is against the Way.

What is against the Way will die early.

One who is abundant in virtue is much like a newborn child; bees, scorpions and snakes will not sting or bite such a one.

Wild beasts will not sink claws into the infant, nor will birds of prey strike a blow.

Though his bones be soft, and his sinews be weak, his grip will be strong.

The infant doesn't yet know of the union between male and female,

yet this one is perfectly formed, the ultimate in vitality.

Babbling and screaming all day, he does not become hoarse; this shows the harmony of the infant.

To know virtue and harmony like this, to keep it constant, this is illumination.

To try to force life: this bodes ill. To try to exceed nature brings calamity. To try to control nature brings violence.

And things that are over luxurious, overgrown and extremely fecund are not in keeping with the Tao. These things will wither and perish.

