===== Chapter 28 =====

Know the masculine.

Keep to the feminine.

Become for the world a valley.

Being a valley for the world,

Constant virtue does not leave.

Return, go back to infanthood.

Know the white.

Keep to the black.

Become for the world an example.

Being an example for the world,

Constant virtue does not err.

Return, go back to non-extremity.

Know the glorious.

Keep to the humble.

Become for the world a waterway.

Being a waterway for the world,

Constant virtue indeed suffices.

Return, go back to simplicity.

Simplicity splits and then becomes instruments.

The sages use them and then become governmental leaders.

Thus, the Great System does not divide.

Know the male, maintain the female, Become the channel of the world, And Te will endure. Return to infancy.

Know the white, sustain the black, Become the pattern of the world, And Te will not falter. Return to the uncarved block.

Know honour, sustain disgrace, Become the valley of the world, And Te will prevail. Return to simplicity.

Simplicity divided becomes utensils That are used by the Sage as high official. But great governing does not carve up.

Be aware of what's masculine in you,

But preserve what is feminine in you,

And serve as a conduit for the world.

When you serve as a conduit for the world

Your true virtue will never be gone.

And you'll return again to the state of a newborn child.

Be aware of what is bright in you,

But preserve what is dark in you,

And serve as a guide for the world.

When you serve a guide for the world

Your true virtue will never falter,

And you'll return again to the state of boundlessness.

Be aware of what's praiseworthy in you,

But preserve what is base in you,

And serve as a valley for the world.

When you serve as a valley for the world

Your true virtue will grow ample enough,

And you'll return again to the simplicity of uncut wood.

Divided, the wood becomes a rod.

Used by a sage, the rod becomes a ruler's staff.

A great ruler keeps things whole; he does not divide.

YIN POWER

She -

Knowing the Yang, yet keeping to the Yin,

Like a valley stream receives All Things under the heavens.

Never departing from the eternal Te,

Returns to the innocence of childhood.

She -

Knowing whiteness, lightness and glory, yet,

Keeping to blackness, darkness and humility,

becomes an example to the world.

Never deviating from the eternal Te,

Returns to the ultimate mysterious

primordial essence.

She -

Knowing honor and glory, yet,

Keeping to obscurity and humility,

becomes the receptive valley of the world.

Being proficient in the eternal Te,

Returns, as to an uncarved block.

As uncarved wood is cut -

The Tao is transformed into myriad things.

The Sage, in using it, attains awesome power.

A truly wise ruler is a careful carver,

Ruling as sparsely and carefully

as she carves.

Know your masculine.

Maintain your feminine.

Act in Heaven below's (the sacred body) valley.

Act in Heaven below's valley.

The eternal action of the soul does not divide or separate.

Return and revert to your original state like that of a new born child.

Know your purity.

Observe your evil.

Become an example of Heaven below.

Become an example of Heaven below.

The eternal action of the soul does not falter.

Return and revert to the origin through the highest emptiness.

Know your beauty.

Observe your shame.

Act in Heaven below's empty spaces.

Act in Heaven below's empty spaces.

Eternal action of the soul is enough.

Return and restore the purity of uncarved wood or uncut jade.

Purity* disperses and becomes the vessel.

The sage uses it and becomes an enduring leader.

Hence great rulers do no harm

* Purity: Energy from the Source of all creation.

THE RETURN TO SIMPLICITY

Balance thy male strength with thy female weakness and thou shalt attract

all things, as the ocean absorbeth all rivers; for thou shalt formulate

the excellence of the Child eternal, simple, and perfect. Knowing the light,

remain in the Dark. Manifest not thy Glory, but thine obscurity. Clothed in

this Child-excellence eternal, thou hast attained the Return of the First

State. Knowing splendour of Fame, cling to Obloquy and Infamy; then shalt

thou remain as in the Valley to which flow all waters, the lodestone to

fascinate all men. Yea, they shall hail in thee this Excellence, eternal,

simple and perfect, of the Child.

The
raw material, wrought into form, produceth vessels. So the sage

King formulateth his Wholeness in divers Offices; and his Law is without

violence or constraint.

Whoever is manly and strong, yet gentle of deeds, becomes the streamof the world, remains in steadfast virtue and returns to nature like achild. Whoever feels in himself the Light and fights Darkness becomes asymbol for the World. Whoever becomes a symbol for the world, steadfastin virtue, returns to the very substance of Being. Whoever feels his ownHeight still lives in humility, becomes like a fertile valley. Whoeverbecomes a valley of the world, is of eternal virtue and returns to thevery substance of Being. Man is like uncut timber, only intuitive insightbrings about perfection. The Sage in his virtue is the first in his community.A true ruler has no need of aggression.

One who knows his strength and yet stays mild, is the least

Whoever is the least, is balanced like the open-minded child he once was

One who has fathomed the lie is an example for the world

One who became human again is an example for the world

One knowing oneself, is a knowing among the ignorant

One who has returned to his original purity, realizes his grandeur

One who has abandoned his origin, becomes civilized

To the wise man they are like actors

He who knows how to be aggressive, and yet remains patient, becomes a receptacle for all Nature's lessons. Being thus receptive, he continually reembodies intelligence, and recuperates his primal nature.

He who knows how to be brilliant, and yet remains demure, becomes the ideal which all things have as their ultimate goal. Being thus the ideal, he actualizes the unending goal of existence, and reinstates his primordial condition of perfect self sufficiency.

He who know how to be proud, and yet remains humble, becomes the recipient of all Nature's bounties. Being thus receptive, he reintegrates intrinsic goodness, and restores primitive wholeness.

Intrinsic goodness, when devoted to varieties of uses, functions as instrumental value. When the intelligent man employs instrumental values, he treats them as means to ends, For he is concerned with the ultimate ends, never mistaking the means as ends in themselves.

"He who knows the males, yet cleaves to what is female

Because like a ravine, receiving all things under heaven,"

And being such a ravine

He knows all the time a power that he never calls upon in vain.

This is returning to the state of infancy.

He who knows the white, (yet cleaves to the black

Becomes the standard by which all things are tested;

And being such a standard

He has all the time a power that never errs,

He returns to the Limitless.

He who knows glory,) yet cleaves to ignominy

Become like a valley that receives into it all things under heaven,

And being such a valley

He has all the time a power that suffices;

He returns to the state of the Uncarved Block.

Now when a block is sawed up it is made into implements;

But when the Sage uses it, it becomes Chief of all Ministers.

Truly, "The greatest carver does the least cutting".

Know the strength of the male, but keep to the role of the female.

Be the river of the world.

Being the river of the world, supreme virtue flows without end.

Flowing without end, you are the timeless infant.

Know the purity of light but maintain darkness.

Be the model of the world.

Being the model of the world, supreme virtue is constant.

Maintaining constant virtue, you are the boundless realm.

Be worthy of high honors, but keep to the role of the lowly.

Be the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world, supreme virtue is fulfilled.

Being fulfilled, you are the uncarved block.

The uncarved block appears as separate things.

The sage sees things as they are and rules the world.

Great power does not divide.

Know the masculine

(But) keep the feminine

Serve as a stream to the world

Serving as stream to the world

Consistent character will not depart

(But) return home again as the newborn child

Know the bright

(But) keep the dark

Serve as a model to the world

Serving as model to the world

Consistent character will not falter

(But) return home again as unlimited

Know the honored

(But) keep the humble

Serve as a valley to the world

Serving as valley to the world

Consistent character will then be enough

A return journey home to original nature

Original nature, cut up, is then made into artifacts

Wise ones, using such things,

Are then made into senior officials

And so the greatest governing does the least dividing

Being female

When you know the strength of man,

Yet keep a woman's care!

You will be the ravine of the country.

When you are the ravine of the country,

Your constant virtue will not leave.

And when your constant virtue does not leave.

You will return to the state of a little child.

When you know the pure,

Yet keep the soiled!

You will be the valley of the country!

When you are the valley of the country,

Your constant virtue is complete.

And when your constant virtue is complete,

You will return to the state of unvcarved wood.

When you know the white,

Yet keep the black.

You will be the model for the country!

And when you are the model for the country,

Your constant virtue will not go astray,

And when your constant virtue does not go astray,

You will return to the condition without limit.

When uncarved wood is cut up,

It is turned into vessels;

When the sage is used,

He becomes Head of the Officials.

Truly, great carving is done without splitting up.

To know the masculine and yet cleave to the feminine is to be the womb for the world. Being the womb for the world, never departing from the eternal power of Tao, you become as an infant once again: immortal.

To know the bright and yet hold to the dull is to be an example for the world. Being the example for the world, not deviating from the everlasting power of Tao, you return to the infinite once again: limitless.

To know honour and yet keep to humility is to be the valley for the world. Being the valley for the world, rich with the primal power of Tao, you return once again to simplicity, like uncarved wood.

Allow Tao to carve you into a vessel for Tao. Then you can serve the world without mutilating it.

Acknowledge the masculine

And be one with the feminine:

Let the river of your being flow

Into the valley of eternal Nature.

The path of Modesty is true and complete:

Ever returning to the origin,

As a child returns to its mother.

Acknowledge the white,

But trust in the black:

Let Nature be the mold

Into which you pour

The liquid energy of your being.

Let Modesty guide you;

Perseveringly return to the Source

Of limitless serenity.

Be aware of your influence,

Yet act from humility:

Let your action be drawn from

The valley's fertile depths,

And Modesty will be furthered.

Returning to your perfect nature,

You may be shaped and arrayed-

Honed to a sparse and simple beauty.

Thus do the Sage and the Cosmic Helpers

Create completion and fulfillment-

Not through division and reduction-

But through transformation.

For me, the central metaphor of this poem is the feminine principle that Lao Tzu weaves throughout the Tao Te Ching. I don't know whether Lao Tzu would identify himself as a feminist; but I suspect that he'd rather have nothing to do with "-ism's of any sort. In any event, this is not a poem about women, but about the feminine. Science teaches us that estrogen (the female hormone) is as essential to men as testosterone (the male hormone) is to women. No surprise here: science, at its best, discovers the same truths that poetry delivers—just in a slightly different language.

As a teacher and poet, feminine images mean something to Lao Tzu: the valley may be thought of as a symbol of the source, or origin, of being—the place where conception and birth occur. Water also has feminine associations: it is the home-element of the developing fetus, and it is the nourishing, life-giving substance which makes up the great majority of both our planet and our physical bodies. These simple facts point to an equally simple reality: no matter your outer gender or sexual orientation, there is a feminine principle within you, which needs to be discovered and experienced. When it is repressed or denied, we are abdicating an essential aspect of our true and complete nature, and this alienates us from ourselves and our cosmic home.

But when we open ourselves to the inner feminine, suddenly our understanding widens, and our ability to act in harmony with our true nature and its Source is furthered. This is the unforced action of Modesty (Te) as a Cosmic principle applied to human life: when you draw energy from this fertile valley of Modesty, then your action returns that energy back, pure and undistorted, to the Cosmic Whole. This, indeed, is how life is meant to be lived—as a beneficent cycle of being, in which a person uses the gift of his life-force (chi) to further the strength and purity of the Source from which he has drawn his being.

He who knows the mystic male (Yang)

yet retains the mystic female (Yin)

is as a great canyon welcoming the whole world.

He has Teh and is innocent as a child.

Whoever
is aware of the white (Yang)

yet retains the black (Yin)

is as a standard for all the world.

He has Teh and has returned to the Absolute.

Whoever
is aware of fame and glory

yet retains humility and obscurity

is as a valley that can hold the earth.

He has Teh and has returned to Unity.

Divide
the Unity; the parts become as tools.

In the hands of the truly wise

they become the means to an end,

but never ends in themselves.

One conscious of virility, maintaining muliebrity, is a world-channel. From a world-channel the unchanging energy never departs. This is to revert to the state of infancy.

One conscious of brightness, placid in shade, is a world-model. In a world-model the unchanging energy remains undiminished. This is to revert to the unlimited.

One conscious of merit, content in disgrace, is a world-valley. In a world-valley the unchanging energy is sufficient. This is to revert to simplicity.

Simplicity scattered becomes capacity, and in the hands of the Holy Man, administrators.

Thus the Supreme Mandate may not be sundered.

He who knows the masculine and yet keeps to the feminine Will become a channel drawing all the world towards it; Being a channel of the world, he will not be severed from the eternal virtue, And then he can return again to the state of infancy.

He who knows the white and yet keeps to the black Will become the standard of the world; Being the standard of the world, with him eternal virtue will never falter, And then he can return again to the absolute.

He who knows honour and yet keeps to humility Will become a valley that receives all the world into it; Being a valley of the world, with him eternal virtue Will be complete, And then he can return again to wholeness.

Wholeness, when divided, will make vessels of utility; These when employed by the Sage will become officials and chiefs. However, for a great function no discrimination is needed.

Opposites and Primitivism

To know its 'male'

and preserve its 'female'

is to act as the world's ravine.

To act as the world' ravine,

treat virtuosity as constant, and avoid separating

is to return to infancy.

To know its 'white'

and preserve its 'black'

is to act as the world's paradigm.

To act as the world's paradigm,

treat virtuosity as constant and avoid lapses

is to return to the negative ultimate.

To know its 'sublime'

and preserve its 'disgraced'

is to act as the world's valley.

To act as the world's valley,

treating virtuosity as constant is sufficient

to return to uncarved wood.

If wood is split then it is deemed an artifact.

Sages use it

and they are deemed officials and elders.

Thus great systems don't cut.

To be aware of the positive, yet to abide in the negative is to be the abyss of the universe.

To be the abyss of the universe is to not deviate from real attainment and to remain like an innocent child.

To be aware of the white, yet to abide in the black is to be the chasm of the universe.

To be the chasm of the universe is to have sufficient real attainment, and to remain in the state of original non-differentiation.

When original non-differentiation is differentiated, things are produced.

Yet when the wise makes use of original non-differentiation, he becomes the leader of the people.

Therefore, great governing is non-discriminating.

Recognize the male - the yang,

guard the female - the yin.

Be a valley under Heaven.

Be a valley under Heaven and the constant virtue will not fade away.

One will become like a little child again.

Recognize the white - the yang,

guard the black - the yin.

Be a model under Heaven.

Be a model under Heaven and the constant virtue will not fade away.

One will return to the infinite.

Recognize the glory, guard the disgrace.

Be a valley under Heaven.

Be the valley under Heaven and return again to the uncarved block.

When the block is carved up it is transformed into useful wares.

The sage will use them with equal heart.

Therefore the great law will not crumble.

Knowing his masculinity,

Adhering to his femininity,

He remained to all under heaven a brook.

Being to all under heaven a brook,

His constant virtue never departed.

His constant virtue never departed,

He again reverted to infancy.

Knowing his whiteness

Adhering to his blackness,

He remained to all under heaven a valley.

Being to all under heaven a valley,

His constant virtue was sufficient.

His constant virtue being sufficient,

He again reverted to the unhewn log.

[Knowing his whiteness,

Adhering to his blackness,

He remained to all under heaven a horizontal bar

Being to all under heaven a horizontal bar,

His constant virtue never changed.

His constant virtue never changed,

He again reverted to Infinity.]

When the unhewn log dispersed,

It became vessels;

When the sage man was employed,

He became chief of the officialdom.

A great tailor does no cutting.

The person who holds on to masculinity but also preserves femininity

Will be a channel that draws the entire world through it,

And, being a channel for the entire world, will not lack eternal heroism,

And can then return to the purity of his childhood.

The person who holds on to white, but also preserves black

Will be a sign and an example for the world,

And, being a sign and an example for the world, will not lack eternal heroism,

And can then return to the infinite absolute.

The person who holds on to honor but also preserves humility

Will be a valley that absorbs the whole world into it,

And, being a valley that absorbs the whole world into it, will not lack eternal heroism,

And can then return to fundamental perfection.

Fundamental perfection, when divided up, will become vessels of many uses,

And these will be used by the sage, officers, and ministers.

However, in order to be great and ruling and supreme, there is no need for division.

Know the male

But keep to the role of the female

And be a ravine to the empire.

If you are a ravine to the empire,

Then the constant virtue will not desert you

And you will again return to being a babe.

Know
the white

But keep to the role of the sullied

And be a model to the empire.

If you are a model to the empire,

Then the constant virtue will not be wanting

And you will return to the infinite,

Know
honour

But keep to the role of the disgraced

And be a valley to the empire.

If you are a valley to the empire,

Then the constant virtue will be sufficient

And you will return to being the uncarved block.

When
the uncarved block shatters it becomes vessels.

The sage makes use of these and becomes the lord over the officials.

Hence
the greatest cutting does not sever.

Returning to Simplicity

"Who his manhood shows

And his womanhood knows

Becomes the empire's river.

Is he the empire's river,

He will from virtue never deviate,

And home he turneth to a child's estate.

"Who his brightness shows

And his blackness knows

Becomes the empire's model.

Is he the empire's model,

Of virtue ne'er shall he be destitute,

And home he turneth to the absolute.

"Who knows his fame

And guards his shame

Becomes the empire's valley.

Is he the empire's valley,

For e'er his virtue will sufficient be,

And home he turneth to simplicity."

Simplicity, when scattered, becomes a vessel of usefulness. The holy man, by using it, becomes the chief leader; and truly, a great principle will never do harm.

Know how to be assertive but remain passive. Be receptive towards all situations and you will be in accordance with them, like a little child. Understanding the conditionality of opposites, you can avoid all opposition. Never in error, you are virtuous. People are bound to follow such and example. Know the personal, but keep to the impersonal: Accept the world as it is. If you accept the world as it is you will naturally be humble. How can the impersonal be arrogant? In this way the master is like a block of wood, which can be carved into any shape.

Know steeliness, but prefer tenderness.

Be the brook to the world.

The brook to the world is never disunited from virtue.

It aims to return to infancy.

Know limelight, but prefer shadow.

Be the standard to the world.

The standard to the world never deviates from virtue.

It aims to return to the Infinite.

Know fame, but prefer humility.

Be the valley to the world.

The valley to the world is filled with virtue.

It aims to return to simplicity.

Simplicity dissipates when [a block] is carved into a vessel.

A sage diminishes when [he/she] is used as a leader.

Thus, a great system is not cut up.

Knowing the masculine

and nurturing the feminine

you become the river of all beneath heaven.

River of all beneath heaven

you abide by perennial Integrity

and so return to infancy.

Knowing the white

and nurturing the black

you become the pattern of all beneath heaven.

Pattern of all beneath heaven

you abide by perennial Integrity

and so return to the boundless.

Knowing splendor

and nurturing ruin

you become the valley of all beneath heaven.

Valley of all beneath heaven

you rest content in perennial Integrity

and so return to the simplicity of uncarved wood.

When uncarved wood is split apart

it becomes mere implements.

But when a sage is employed

he becomes a true minister,

for the great governing blade carves nothing.

He who knows the male, yet keeps to the female,

Is like the ravine of the world.

Being the ravine of the world,

He never departs from the eternal virtue, and

Returns to the state of harmony with Nature as in infancy.

He who knows the white, yet keeps to the black,

Is the model for the world.

Being the model for the world,

He never deviates from the eternal virtue, and

Returns to the state of selflessness as in primordial times.

He who knows glory, but keeps to humility,

Is like the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world, he is sufficient in the eternal virtue, and

Returns to the sate of natural goodness like virgin blocks.

When the blocks are dispersed and found useful as tools,

The wise ruler employs them to govern and lead.

Therefore the great leader does not destroy Nature.

Know
what is male

Keep to what is female

Act as the ravine of the world.

Acting as the ravine of the world

The ideal entirely lacks separation

Return, merge with, relate to a newborn child.

Know
what is white

Keep to what is black

Act as the model of the world.

Acting as the model of the world

The ideal entirely lacks error

Return, merge with, relate to an absence of reaching limits.

Know
what is honorable

Keep to what is humiliating

Act as the valley of the world.

Acting as the valley of the world

The ideal entirely becomes sufficient

Return, merge with, relate to true nature.

True
nature broken and scattered

Next comes action as tools

Being used by sages

Next comes action as mediums for growth.

In
this way great tailors are not cutting.

Being aware of one's virile strength (knowing that one is a cock), and yet holding oneself willingly in the inferior state of the female (of the hen); keeping oneself willingly in the lowest place in the empire ... To demean oneself thus shows that one has retained the primordial virtue, (absolute disinterestedness, participation in the Principle).

Knowing oneself to be enlightened, and willingly passing oneself off as ignorant; willingly letting oneself be walked over ... To behave thus is to show that the primordial virtue has not wavered in oneself, that one is still united with the first Principle.

Knowing oneself worthy of fame, yet staying in voluntary obscurity; willingly making oneself the valley (the lowest point) of the empire ... To behave thus is to show that one has the original self-sacrifice still intact that one is still in the state of natural simplicity.

(The Sage will refuse therefore the burden of being a governor. If he is constrained to accept such a post, then he will remind himself that) the multiplicity of beings have come from the primordial unity by a scattering. (That he will never busy himself with these diverse beings), but govern as chief of the officials (as prime mover), uniquely applying himself to general government, without occupying himself with details.

Know the masculine, hold to the feminine

Be the watercourse of the world

Being the watercourse of the world

The eternal virtue does not depart

Return to the state of the infant

Know the white, hold to the black

Be the standard of the world

Being the standard of the world

The eternal virtue does not deviate

Return to the state of the boundless

Know the honor, hold to the dishonor

Be the valley of the world

Being the valley of the world

The eternal virtue shall be sufficient

Return to the state of plain wood

Plain wood splits, then becomes tools

The sages utilize them

And then become leaders

Thus the greater whole is undivided

RETURNING TO SIMPLICITY

He who knows his manhood and understands his womanhood becomes useful like the valleys of earth (which bring water). Being like the valleys of earth, eternal vitality (teh) will not depart from him, he will come again to the nature of a little child.

He who knows his innocence and recognizes his sin becomes the world's model. Being a world's model, infinite teh will not fail, he will return to the Absolute.

He who knows the glory of his nature and recognizes also his limitations becomes useful like the world's valleys. Being like the world's valleys, eternal teh will not fail him, he will revert to simplicity.

Radiating simplicity he will make of men vessels of usefulness. The wise man then will employ them as officials and chiefs. A great administration of such will harm no one.

To know (chih) the male,

But to abide (shou) by the female (tz'u),

Is to be the valley (ch'i) of the world.

Being the valley of the world,

And departing (li) not from the everlasting power (ch'ang te),

One again returns to the infant (ying erh).

To know (chih) the white (pe),

But to abide (shou) by the black (heh),

Is to be the model (shih) of the world.

Being the model of the world,

And deviating (t'eh) not from the everlasting power,

One again returns to the unlimited (wu-chi).

To know (chih) the illustrious (yung),

But to abide (shou) by the obscure (ju),

Is to be the valley (ku) of the world.

Being the valley of the world,

One's everlasting power (ch'ang te) being full,

One again returns to the uncarved wood (p'u).

The uncarved wood disperses to become vessels (ch'i),

To be used (yung) by the sage as officials.

Therefore a great institution does not mutilate (ko).

He who knows the mystic male (Yang) yet retains the mystic female (Yin) is as a great canyon welcoming the whole world. He has Teh and is innocent as a child.

Whoever is aware of the white (Yang) yet retains the black (Yin) is as a standard for all the world. He has Teh and has returned to the Absolute. Whoever is aware of fame and glory yet retains humility and obscurity is as a valley that can hold the earth. He has Teh and has returned to Unity.

Divide the Unity; the parts become as tools. In the hands of the truly wise they become the means to an end, but never ends in themselves.

Know the male, maintain the female: become the channel of all things.

Become the channel of all things, and true power [Te] will endure.

You will be reborn.

Know the white, maintain the black: become the form of all things.

Become the form of all things, and true power [Te] will endure.

You will return to the Infinite.

Know honor, maintain humility: become the valley of all things.

Become the valley of all things, and true power [Te] will endure.

You will find the simplicity of nature.

Uncarved wood, when carved by the Tao–Master,

becomes a well–governed state.

The best carving is that which is not carved at all.

Twenty-eight

Know the strength of man,

But keep a woman's care!

Be the stream of the universe!

Being the stream of the universe,

Ever true and unswerving,

Become as a little child once more.

Know the white,

But keep the black!

Be an example to the world!

Being an example to the world,

Ever true and unwavering,

Return to the infinite.

Know
honor,

Yet keep humility.

Be the valley of the universe!

Being the valley of the universe,

Ever true and resourceful,

Return to the state of the uncarved block.

When
the block is carved, it becomes useful.

When the sage uses it, he becomes the ruler.

Thus, "A great tailor cuts little."

Though knowing what is masculine,

You are ready to play the role of female

And content to be a stream in the world.

Content to be a stream in the world,

You will be accompanied by the eternal virtue,

And return to being a baby.

Though knowing what is white,

You are ready to play the role of black,

And content to be a model of the world.

Content to be a model of the world,

You will be no longer at odds with the eternal virtue,

And return to the final truth.

Though knowing what is honor,

You are ready to play the role of the disgraced

And content to be a valley in the world.

Content to be a valley in the world,

You will no longer lack the eternal virtue,

And return to simplicity (Tao).

When simplicity gets shattered and becomes materialized,

The sage makes use of it to be the lord over other officials.

One should know

The greatest system is not separable.

He knows the male,

Yet holds fast to the female,

And thus becomes the ravine of all under Heaven.

When he becomes the ravine of all under Heaven,

The constant Te will never desert him.

He returns to the baby.

He knows white,

Yet holds fast to black,

And thus becomes the model for all under Heaven.

When he becomes the model for all under Heaven,

The constant Te will never fail him.

He returns to the infinite.

He knows glory,

Yet holds fast to ignominy,

And thus becomes the valley of all under Heaven.

When he becomes the valley of all under Heaven,

His constant Te will be sufficient,

He returns to the uncarved block.

When the uncarved block scatters, it turns into vessels.

When the sage uses them,

He becomes chief of ministers.

Therefore great cutting does not split.

Knowing the excitement of proactivity, you settle for quietude.

Everyone will converge to you like water flowing towards the valley.

Thus, you are like the valley to the world.

Holding fast to the "absolute virtue" (Dao),

You try to return to the pristine innocence of an infant.

You know the benefit of the limelight, but choose to be anonymous.

You set this example for others to follow.

Holding fast to the "absolute virtue" unerringly,

You hope to return to the path of Dao.

Knowing the lure of fame and glory, you choose humility instead.

By your taking a low profile, everyone converges to you like water flowing towards the ravine.

Thus, you are the ravine to the world.

The "absolute virtue" is bountiful.

Finally, it returns to the naturalness of a raw timber.

The natural block once carved becomes useful utensils.

The sage utilises them as leaders.

The system set up by the sage should cause no harm.

Return to Simplicity

Fan P'u

He, who knows the Male

And yet holds on to the Female,

Becomes the ravine of the world.

Being the ravine of the world,

He is always in union with Eternal Virtue,

And returns to the state of the new-born babe.

He, who knows the white (Yang)

And yet holds on to the black (Yin),

Becomes a model for the world.

Being a model for the world,

His Eternal Virtue becomes unerring,

And he returns to the Infinite.

He, who is aware of glory

And yet holds on to ignominy,

Becomes the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world,

His Eternal Virtue becomes sufficient,

And he returns to the state of virgin wood (simplicity).

The virgin wood, on being cut up, is used as implements.

Sages, who make use of the implements,

Become high officials and leaders.

The Supreme Ruler uses the wood without cutting it.

He who while recognizing his manhood

Yet holds also to his womanhood,

Becomes a channel for all the world.

Bieng a channel for all the world,

Everlasting virtue will never leave him:

He goes back to the state of childhood.

He who knows the light that shines within him,

Yet veils himself in darkness,

Becomes a standard for the world.

Being a standard for the world,

Everlasting virtue cleaves to him:

He returns to the Never-shanging.

He who, knowing honour, yet dwells in humility

Becomes a valley for all the world.

Being a vlaley for all the world,

Everlasting virtue will abide in him:

He returns to Wholeness.

This Wholeness when broken may produce many useful instruments;

But used by the Sage, it becomes the minister of ministers.

And truly, the Greatest Ruler interferes the least.

Know the masculine;

Keep to the feminine.

Be beneath-heaven's ravine.

To be beneath-heaven's ravine

Is to stay with unceasing virtue

And return to infancy.

Know the white;

Keep to the black.

Be beneath-heaven's model.

To beneath-heaven's valley

Is to stay with abundant virtue

And return to simplicity.

When simplicity diversifies

It produces instruments

That the sage uses as officers.

Indeed, a great leader does little cutting.

Know that you possess the strong masculine principle,

yet abide by the meek, feminine principle.

Thus, become the flowing stream of the world.

As the flowing stream of the world,

never swerve from your true nature.

In this way, you return to the originality of a newborn babe.

Know the bright, yet keep to the dark.

Never wavering from the subtle truth,

you will conform to the pattern of an integral being.

In this way, you return again to the infinite.

Know how to be honored and glorified,

yet maintain unadorned plainness.

Thus, become the abundant valley of the world.

As the abundant valley of the world,

you realize the sufficiency of the constant, subtle virtue of the integral universe.

In this way, you return to the original simplicity of an uncarved block of wood with undamaged potential.

An integral individual, by preserving the original qualities of his being,

maintains his supreme, integral nature.

When the uncarved block is shaped into various single tools and vessels,

its original qualities are destroyed.

This is called "the great Oneness that cannot be divided."

XXVIII.

Returning
to Simplicity

He
who knows the masculine, and yet retains the feminine,

Will
be the whole world s channel, being so,

Eternal
virtue will with him remain forevermore,

And
infant innocency to him go.

He
who knows the spotless white, yet keeps the darkness of the night,

Will
be the whole world s model, and the sage

Will
hold eternal virtue in his hands forevermore,

And
go home again to greet the golden age.

He
who knows how glory shines, yet degradation ne er declines,

Will
be the whole world s valley, him alone

Will
the spirit of eternal virtue fill forevermore,

And
simplicity will claim him as her own.

This
unwrought simplicity, when scattered comes to be

The
universal vessels, and the sage

May
use them as the rulers of the realm forevermore,

And every
hurt and injury assuage.

To know manly strength, to guard womanly gentleness,

Is to be the central channel of the kingdom.

To be the central channel of the kingdom, always manifesting life, never guilty, is to return to the innocence of childhood.

To know light, to guard the darkness,

Is to be the model of the kingdom.

To be the model of the kingdom, always manifesting life, never at fault, is to return to the bounds of the Inner Kingdom.

To know glory, to guard humility,

Is to be the valley of the kingdom.

To be the valley of the kingdom, always manifesting life becoming perfect, is to return to a condition like undressed wood.

Undressed wood, being made into many utensils,

The self-controlled man uses them,

Then he becomes Ruler for a long time,

Thus he achieves greatness without hurt to anyone.

Know
the masculine,

Keep
to the feminine,

And
be the

Brook
of the World.

To
be the Brook of the World is

To
move unchanging

in
the path of Power

Without
swerving from it,

And
to return again to infancy.

Know
the white,

Keep
to the black,

And
be the Pattern of the World.

To
be the Pattern of the World is

To
move unchanging in the path of Power

Without
making a single wrong step, And to return again to the Infinite.

Know
the glorious,

Keep
to the lowly,

And
be the Fountain of

the
World.

To
be the Fountain of

the
World is

To
live the

life
of Virute (Power) ,

And
to return again to

the
First Simplicity.

When
the First Simplicity

splits
apart,

It
becomes useful tools,

Then
in the hands

of
a Complete Thinker,

make
them leaders.

"a
great tailor does little cutting."

Conscious of what is virile, yet keeping to what is feminine, that is being a ravine for All-under-heaven. Because he is a ravine for All-under-heaven, the permanent Virtue ("Power", Te) will not seep out. He returns to the state of infancy.

Conscious of what is white, yet keeping to what is black, that is being a measure for All-under-heaven. Because he is a measure for All-under-heaven, the permanent Virtue ("Power", Te) will not fail him. He returns to that state where there are no poles.

Conscious of what is glorious, yet keeping to ignominy, that is being a valley for All-under-heaven. Because he is a valley for All-under-heaven, the permanent Virtue ("Power", Te) will be sufficient. He returns to the state of uncarved wood.

Uncarved wood (cut and) dispersed forms (various) vessels, but the Saint, by using it, becomes the chief minister.

For great carving is not done by hacking.

Who knows his manhood's strength,

Yet still his female feebleness maintains;

As to one channel flow the many drains,

All come to him, yea, all beneath the sky.

Thus he the constant excellence retains;

The simple child again, free from all stains.

Who
knows how white attracts,

Yet always keeps himself within black's shade,

The pattern of humility displayed,

Displayed in view of all beneath the sky;

He in the unchanging excellence arrayed,

Endless return to man's first state has made.

Who
knows how glory shines,

Yet loves disgrace, nor e'er for it is pale;

Behold his presence in a spacious vale,

To which men come from all beneath the sky.

The unchanging excellence completes its tale;

The simple infant man in him we hail.

The
unwrought material, when divided and distributed, forms

vessels. The sage, when employed, becomes the Head of all the

Officers (of government); and in his greatest regulations he employs

no violent measures.

Know ANKH, the Masculine, but remain with-IN, the Great Mother;
be a
Womb for all under Heaven. By being such a Womb,
Super-Ego will never
desert you. If Super-Ego never deserts you,
you will remain forever
Libidinally-newborn.
Know
that you are Innocent; remain steadfast if insulted;
be a welcoming
valley for all under Heaven.
By being a welcoming valley for all under Heaven,
Divinity alone will suffice.
If Divinity alone suffices for you, you will
remain a simple un-hewn log.
Know
whiteness but remain in the dark, and be a model for all under Heaven.
By
being a model for all under Heaven, Divinity cannot miss it's mark.
If Divinity
does not miss it's mark, you will remain with the Infinite.
When
an un-hewn log is cut apart, it is made into tools;
when Sages are put to
use, they become the chief of officials..
for-
GREAT SCULPTING CUTS-AWAY
NOTHING.

Know
the strong but keep the weak

The whole wide world is born in you

You'll see just what a child sees

A vast and comprehensive view

Know
the light but keep the dark

And watch ten thousand things emerge

In you they have their residence

Where space and time converge

Know
the high but keep the low

Humility will honor you

Attend to your vacuity

There's nothing else to do

Be
like an uncarved block of wood

Don't squander your potential

Or overlook your vacant core

Nothing else is so essential

KNOW the masculine,

Keep to the feminine,

And be the Brook of the World.

To be the Brook of the World is

To move constantly in the path of Virtue

Without swerving from it,

And to return again to infancy.

Know the white,

Keep to the black,

And be the Pattern of the World.

To be the Pattern of the World is

To move constantly in the path of Virtue

Without erring a single step,

And to return again to the Infinite.

Know the glorious,

Keep to the lowly,

And be the Fountain of the World.

To be the Fountain of the World is

To live the abundant life of Virtue,

And to return again to Primal Simplicity.

When Primal Simplicity diversifies,

It becomes useful vessels,

Which, in the hands of the Sage, become officers.

Hence, "a great tailor does little cutting."

Know your male qualities,

Yet know how to use the female abilities.

Be like a channel for the world's waters;

Open and flowing, like the mind of a child.

Full of virtue, harmony and excellence.

Know the light,

But understand the dark.

Be an example for the world.

Act with honor, and retain humility.

Return to the state of the uncarved wooden block.

Know the masculine,

but keep to the feminine:

and become a watershed to the world.

If you embrace the world,

the Tao will never leave you

and you become as a little child.

Know
the white,

yet keep to the black:

be a model for the world.

If you are a model for the world,

the Tao inside you will strengthen

and you will return whole to your eternal beginning.

Know
the honorable,

but do not shun the disgraced:

embracing the world as it is.

If you embrace the world with compassion,

then your virtue will return you to the Uncarved Block.

The
block of wood is carved into utensils

by carving void into the wood.

The Master uses the utensils, yet prefers to keep to the block

because of its limitless possibilities.

Great works do not involve discarding substance.

The leader can act as a warrior or as a healer. As a warrior, the leader acts with power and decision. That is the Yang or masculine aspect to leadership.

Most of the times, however, the leader acts as a healer and is in an open, receptive, and nourishing state. That is the feminine or Yin aspect of leadership.

This mixture of doing and being, of warrior and healer, is both productive and potent.

There is a third aspect of leadership: Tao. Periodically, the leader withdraws from the group and returns to silence, returns to God.

Being, doing, being ... Tao. I withdraw in order to empty myself of what has happened, you replenish my spirit.

A brilliant warrior does not make every possible brilliant intervention. A knowing healer takes time to nourish self as well as others.

Such simplicity and economy is a valuable lesson. It deeply affects the group.

The leader who knows when to listen, when to act, and when to withdraw can work effectively with nearly anyone, even with other professionals, group leaders, or therapists, perhaps the most difficult and sophisticated group members.

Because the leader is clear, the work is delicate and does not violate anybody's sensibilities.

Know the active, the masculine

Yet keep to the passive, the feminine

And you will cradle the World.

If you lovingly hold the World

You will know eterna goodness

And will become again as a little child.

Be aware of the obvious-the light

But keep to the mysterious-the dark

And set an example for the world.

Be an example for the world

And do not stray from your calling

And you will return to the Eternal.

Know honor

Yet remain humble

And be empty of the world.

Being empty of the world

Is good enough

And you will return to the simplicity of the uncarved block.

If the block is carved it is trapped

In one form and critiqued.

The Sage prefers simplicity and so is ahead of them all.

He knows better than to divide the whole.

Integrate
the male and the female

and travel the peaceful path of oneness.

Be at one with Infinity.

Being at one with Infinity,

do not become confused

in distinctions of male and female.

Experience the oneness

as an undistinguishing child.

See
the white and the black as one.

Be a guiding light to the world.

As a guiding light to the world,

standing firm in the truth of oneness,

mirror Infinity for all to see.

Remember
that honor and humility are one.

Be a vessel of Infinity.

As a vessel of Infinity,

be a resource to all beings.

Become as a piece of uncarved wood;

available for any purpose.

When
a piece of wood is carved, it becomes useful.

When the sage flows in oneness, he becomes useful

as king.

Therefore, the sage is careful in using what he

needs

but avoiding kingship.

Know the Masculine but hold to the Feminine, and be a Valley under Heaven.

To be a Valley under Heaven, never stray from Virtue; revert to a new-born

babe.

Know the White, but hold to the Black, and be a Model under Heaven.

To be a Model under Heaven, do not be extreme; return to moderation.

Know Honor but keep Humble, and be a Valley under Heaven.

To be a Valley under Heaven, let Virtue be sufficient.

Return to Simplicity, gain a reputation for Simplicity.

The does the wise man become a Statesman, and perpetuate a Great System.

He who knows the masculine and keeps to the feminine

Will be the river of the world.1

Being the river of the world

He will never be separated from eternal Virtue,2

Becoming once again a little child.

He who knows the white and keeps to the black

Will be an example for the whole world.

Being an example for the whole world

He will never stray from eternal Virtue,

And he will return to the infinite.

He who knows honour and keeps to the humble

Will be the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world

He will be content with eternal Virtue,

And become like an uncarved block.3

When the block is carved, it is made into useful things.

And when the Sage makes use of them, he becomes the ruler.

It is the best carver who does the least cutting.

1. i.e. as all moisture flows to the main river, so all the people will come to the Sage to be enlightened.

2. i.e. he will be in accord with the Tao, in accord with the way things are naturally meant to be.

3. i.e. the most simple of things, uninfluenced by conscious actions.

One keeps weakness while knowing what strength is,

And serves as the humblest brook for the world.

Being the humblest, one can receive best

Until one returns to be the weakest infant.

One keeps black while knowing what white is,

And serves as a basic model for the world.

Being the basic model, one can receive properly

Until one returns to the oneness without polar opposition.

One keeps disgrace while knowing what glory is,

And serves as the lowest valley for the world.

Being the lowest, one can receive enough

To return to the most original simplicity.

Followed by people, this simplicity can shape the world

The wise use it as the example for the government.

The big system is, therefore, an indivisible simple whole.

Be familiar with Masculinity but watch over Femininity - and become the Valley of the World. Being the Valley of the World, invariant Te will not leave you. Turn back to being an infant.

Be familiar with what is pure and white but watch over what is dark and black - and become the Pattern for the World. Being the Pattern for the World, your invariant Te Will be constant. Turn back to being limitless.

Be familiar with what is praiseworthy but watch over what is disgraceful - and become the Valley of the World. Being the Valley of the World, your invariant Te will be sufficient. Turn back to being an Uncarved Block.

When the Uncarved Block is cut up then it becomes a government tool. When the Wise Person instead uses it then it becomes head of the government Yes: A great carver does no cutting, a great ruler makes no rules.

If you are brave — be humble! And then the entire nation will follow you.

If you became a leader among people, let Great Te be your Guide. And be pure, gentle, and subtle in the soul — like a child!

Abiding in the good, do not forget about the existence of evil! And be an example of righteousness for everyone.

He who became such an example for everyone does not differ by the quality of soul from Great Te. He moves then to the Mergence with the Eternal Tao.

Such a person, though knowing about his own achievements and merits, stays unknown — and he becomes a wise leader.

It is favorable that such a wise person be a leader among people — then there will be order in the state.

He who knows own strengths remains weak,

Being on the Tao Way, he feels like a child.

He who is a scholar behaves like being simple,

He is a good example, always a model on the Tao Way.

He who attains the glory and is humble in his virtue,

Stays with the source from where everything arises.

The
Wise Person is thus always in harmony,

Being in the light, always at rest is one with the infinity.

Know
the male, but keep to the female and be thus a valley to the world. When one
is a valley to the world, the constant virtue will not desert one and one will
return to the state of being an infant. Know the white but keep to the black
and be thus a model to the world. If one is a model to the world, then the constant
virtue will not decline and you will return to the limitless. Know glory but
keep to disgrace and so be a valley to the world. If one is a valley to the
world then constant virtue will be sufficient and you will return to the Uncarved
Block. When the Uncarved Block is cut asunder it then becomes utensils. [But]
should a Sage use such a man, that person would become a senior official. Truly
great fabrication does not involve cutting.

Knowing the male and keeping the female,

One will become the river of the world.

Being the river of the world,

One will not digress from constant virtue,

And will return to being a baby.

Knowing the white and keeping the black,

One will become a model of the world.

Being a model of the world,

One will not deviate from constant virtue,

And will return to the infinite.

Knowing honor and keeping disgrace,

One will become the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world,

One will be content with constant virtue,

And return to the unhewn wood.

Unhewn wood when scattered will become vessels.

The Sage makes use of them to become the chief officer.

Therefore the great system will not be cut apart.

Uniting the Forces

Know the male,

Hold the female;

Become the world's stream.

By being teh world's streawm,

The Power will never leave.

This is returning to Infancy.

Know the white,

Hold to the black;

Become the world's pattern.

By becoming the world's pattern,

The Power will never falter.

This is returning to Limitlessness.

Know the glory,

Hold to the obscurity;

Become the world's valley.

By being the world's valley,

The Power will be sufficient.

This is returning to Simplicity.

When Simplicity is broken up,

It is made into instruments.

Evolved Individuals who employ them,

Are made into leaders.

In this way the Great System is united.

Be like this valley. Accepting sunlight. Accepting rain. Accepting sages and villains. Do this and the Dao will always be with you. Know darkness in this valley. Know the sunlight. The Dao is strong in you. Your tools are from a block of wood. Keep to the block.

Be aware of your masculine nature;

But by keeping the feminine way,

You shall be to the world like a canyon,

Where the Virtue eternal abides,

And go back to become as a child.

Be
aware of the white all around you;

But remembering the black that is there,

You shall be to the world like a tester,

Whom the Virtue eternal, unerring,

Redirects to the infinite past.

Be
aware of your glory and honor;

But in never relinquishing shame,

You shall be to the world like a valley,

Where Virtue eternal, sufficient,

Sends you back to the Virginal Block.

When
the Virginal Block is asunder,

And is made into several tools,

To the ends of the Wise Man directed,

They become then his chief officers:

For "The Master himself does not carve."

He who knows the masculine but keeps to the feminine, is ready to be the ravine under Heaven.

Being the ravine under Heaven, he is not parted from constant "De" (Virtue),

He returns to the simple state, like an infant.

He who knows the white (glory) but keeps to the black (obscure), is ready to be the (divination) instrument of under Heaven.

Being the instrument of under Heaven, he rests upon constant "De,"

He returns to the ultimate truth.

He who knows glory but keeps to disgrace, is ready to be the valley under Heaven.

Being the valley under Heaven, he will have plenty of the eternal "De,"

He returns to simplicity.

When the simplicity is broken up, it is turned into concrete vessels.

By using the breaking up of simplicity, the sage sets up government and leadership.

Therefore the perfect government does not arise out of artificiality.

He who knows the male yet sustains the female will be a river valley for all under Heaven.

He who is a river valley for all under Heaven never separates himself from constant virtue and always reverts to the infant.

He who knows the white yet sustains the black will be a model for all under Heaven.

He who is a model for all under Heaven never deviates from constant virtue

And always reverts to the infinite.

He who knows glory yet sustains disgrace will be a valley for all under Heaven.

He who is a valley for all under Heaven is filled completely by constant virtue, for he always reverts to the uncarved block.

When the uncarved block fragments, it turns into implements.

As the sage would make use of them, he stands as chief of officials over them.

Thus the great carver never cuts.

1. When you know the male yet hold on to the female,

2. You'll be the ravine of the country.

3. When you're the ravine of the country,

4. Your constant virtue will not leave.

5. And when your constant virtue doesn't leave,

6. You'll return to the state of the infant.

7.
When you know the pure yet hold on to the soiled,

8. You'll be the valley of the country.

9. When you're the valley of the country,

10. Your constant virtue is complete.

11. And when your constant virtue is complete,

12. You'll return to the state of uncarved wood.

13.
When you know the white yet hold on to the black,

14. You'll be the model for the country.

15. And when you're the model for the country,

16. Your constant virtue will not go astray.

17. And when your constant virtue does not go astray,

18. You'll return to the condition which has no limit.

19.
When uncarved wood is cut up, it's turned into vessels;

20. When the Sage is used, he becomes the Head of Officials.

21. Truly, great carving is done without splitting up.

If you are strong,
but remain sensitive,

power will flow through you.

With that power,

you'll always be right with Tao:

It's like a whole new life.

If you are idealistic,
but stay rooted in reality,

you are an example to others.

Set that example,

and you'll always be right with Tao:

There is no limit to what you can do.

If you are honorable,
but remain humble,

you will see things as they are

If you see things as they are,

you'll always be right with Tao:

Your life will become simple, yet full of potential.

Let Tao show
you how to get right with Tao,

so your slightest gesture can change the world.

.

The Valley of the World

Know the male and keep to the female.

Become the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world is eternal power

and returning to the innocence of a baby.

Know the bright and keep to the obscure.

Become an example for the world.

Being an example for the world is eternal power

and returning to the infinite.

Know glory and keep to humility.

Become the valley of the world.

Being the valley of the world is eternal power

and returning to the natural.

Breaking up the natural makes instruments.

The wise use them and become leaders.

Therefore a leader does not break.

To be aware of one's male creative power and yet keep to one's female receptiveness is to become a river of life.

As a river of life he is a carrier of virtue and returns home to the security of the childlike state.

To be aware of the Inner Light and yet to keep to the dark is to become a luminary for the world,

As a luminary for the world he returns led from within home to the primordial ground of Suprabeing.

To be aware of one's greatness and nobility and yet keep small and modest is to become a valley floor of life.

As a valley floor of life he finds himself the source of virtue and unites himself with the simplicity of primordial Being.

Where such simplicity spreads it effects the perfecting of man.

The Sage in practicing it guides even the ruling classes without force and injury imperceptibly because self-less.

Keeping to Pristine Simplicity

Lao Tze says,

He who has manhood's strength and takes upon him the female's feebleness;

his inclusiveness is worthy of being looked up to as the world's dale.

Being the world's dale, absolute virtue will not leave him;

further he will enter into a baby's attribute.

He who has the reputation of the pure, and takes upon him the reputation of the unclean;

he is worthy of being looked up to as the world's model.

Being the world's model, absolute virtue will not be in short, further he will be able to attain extreme bliss.

He who has a glorious status, and takes upon himself a humble situation;

is worthy of being looked up to as the world's valley.

Being the world's valley, absolute virtue is sufficient in him;

he will enter into the state of pristine simplicity.

When pristine simplicity is broken off, it turns to appear in various utensil's shapes.

The sage who realizes the importance of pristine simplicity thereby selects the officers.

Therefore the great perfection shouldn't be cut into pieces.

RETAINING INTEGRITY

Whilst
developing creativity,

also cultivate receptivity.

Retain the mind like that of a child,

which flows like running water.

When
considering any thing,

do not lose its opposite.

When thinking of the finite,

do not forget infinity;

Act
with honour, but retain humility.

By acting according to the way of the Tao,

set others an example.

By
retaining the integrity

of the inner and external worlds,

true selfhood is maintained,

and the inner world made fertile.

Know the male,

yet keep to the female:

receive the world in your arms.

If you receive the world,

the Tao will never leave you

and you will be like a little child.

Know the white,

yet keep to the black:

be a pattern for the world.

If you are a pattern for the world,

the Tao will be strong inside you

and there will be nothing you can't do.

Know the personal,

yet keep to the impersonal:

accept the world as it is.

If you accept the world,

the Tao will be luminous inside you

and you will return to your primal self.

The world is formed from the void,

like utensils from a block of wood.

The Master knows the utensils,

yet keeps to the the block:

thus she can use all things.

Know what is the Male - Positive and know what is the Female - Negative.

Be a servant of the world, be a servant of the world, by never departing from virtues in order to lead the world to return to the state of innocent infancy.

Know what is known and reserve what is unknown.

Be a model of the world, be a model of the world, by never failing to attain virtues in order to lead the world to return to a state of "void" - trouble free.

Know what is honorable and know what is dishonorable.

Be the destiny of the world, be the destiny of the world, by constantly accumulating virtues in order to return again to purity Pure Matter.

Ever since Pure Matter purity was changed into civilization,

Sage rulers have used officials as the instruments of rule.

The superior system of rule may exercise no division.

Understanding the male and holding onto the female

Enables the flow of the world.

This being the flow of the world, the eternal action abides.

Knowing that the eternal action abides is to return to childhood.

Understanding the pure and holding on to the impure

Enables the cleansing of the world.

With the cleansing of the world, ongoing action suffices.

When ongoing action suffices, it returns to simplicity.

Understanding the white and holding on to the black

Enables the formation of the world.

Being the formation of the world, ongoing action does not stray.

When ongoing action does not stray, it returns to the infinite.

This simplicity takes shape as a mechanism.

The sage makes it the head ruler.

Great ruling never divides.

XXVIII

Know
the male principle, but practice the female

You will be like a ravine that gathers all things into itself

And shelters all who enter

Hold to this virtue, and you'll be as soft and accepting as an infant

Know
perfection, but let imperfection be

You will be like a valley in which all manner of things are grown

Fertile ground for every thought, every action

Hold to this virtue, and you'll be as full of potential as uncarved wood

Know
brightness, but let yourself be dark

You will become a model of common sense and propriety

Quiet and respected

Hold to this virtue, and you'll live till the mother calls you back

Others
become tools, carved into shapes that fit their functions

The taoist lets himself be used however is needed

Leads without a destination in mind

By not being shaped, the world shapes itself around him

Know the Male

Know the Male Know the male, keep the female;

be humble toward the world.

Be humble to the world,

and eternal power never leaves,

returning again to innocence.

Knowing the white, keep the black;

be an exemplar for the world.

Be an exemplar for the world,

and eternal power never goes awry,

returning again to infinity.

Knowing the glorious, keep the ignominious;

be open to the world.

Be open to the world,

and eternal power suffices,

returning again to simplicity.

Simplicity is lost to make instruments,

which sages employ as functionaries.

Therefore the great fashioner does no splitting.

Knowing what nobility is, the sage stays with the lowly, as if the creek of the world.

As the creek of the world he flows without leaving the general Te until he reaches a status as innocent as a baby.

Knowing what cleanliness is, he does not mind staying dirty, He acts as the norm of the world.

As the norm of the world, he makes no mistakes, until he approaches Tao.

Knowing what honor is, he tolerates insults.

He acts as the valley of the world.

As the valley of the world, he is filled with general Te, until he returns to simplicity.

Wood that has been naturally broken can be made into utensils.

When sages are employed, they can be officers.

Great systems do not need to be carved.

To know the masculine, to keep to the feminine, that is to be the brook of the world.

To be the brook of the world is to move constantly in the path of Virtue without swerving from it, and to return again to infancy.

To know the white, to keep to the black, that is to be the model of the world.

To be the model of the world is to move constantly in the path of Virtue without erring a single step, and to return again to infinite nothingness.

To know the glorious, to keep to the humble, that is to be the fountain of the world.

To be the fountain of the world is to live the abundant life of Virtue, and to return again to the uncarved block.

When the uncarved block stops being uncarved, it becomes useful vessels.

When the sage uses them, they become officials.

Hence, "A great tailor does not cut."

Be a man, learn woman's way, as the lake valley of the universe.

Being the lake valley of the universe, no virtue (or jing, semen) escape,

returning as a new born.

For the white, know it has black, as the law to the world.

Being an law to the world, no virtue disperse,

returning to the infinite.

Honor, know it could be the source of humility,

be the valley of the universe.

Being the valley of the universe,

all virtues converge,

returning to pooh (the original).

When the pooh lost, it becomes things,

and sages set up systems to manage them.

However, the true sage will not divide (the original).

Develop the strength of a man,

but live as gently as a woman.

Become a brook and receive all things under heaven.

If you are such a brook

then Virtue will constantly flow into you

and you will become a simple child again.

Know
thew pure

but live the life of the sullied.

Become a fountain to all things under heaven.

If you bccome such a fountain

then you will have abundant Virtue

and you will return to the state of the Uncarved Block.

When
the Uncarved Block is cut up into pieces,

it is turned into specialized instruments.

But the True Person makes use of it whole

and becomes the master of the instruments.

Hence,
it is said, "The finest carver cuts little."

One
who knows religion

and holds close to atheism

is like the valley of the world

into which everything flows.

Being the valley

everything is drawn to it

like the actions of a young child.

Learn the simple and easy, the myths and traditions,

but study the deep and profound, the experiences and insights,

become the model of being.

By becoming the model of being,

loosing the boundaries and limits,

return to the source.

A
person who has experienced glory and honor

yet lives a quiet and meager existence

is like the valley of the world.

Everything is drawn to it.

All power is there

all simplicity

all wholeness.

When power is divided, it is cut up up into departments, chain stores, churches,
vice presidencies and district managers, ...

So they say, "the best sculptor does the least carving."

"He who knows the male (active force), yet keeps to the female (the passive
force or receptive element), becomes like a ravine, receiving all sort of things.

Being the all-encompassing ravine he knows a power that he never calls upon
in vain. This is returning to the state of infancy.

He who knows the white, yet keeps and cleaves to the black becomes the standard
by which all things are tested, he becomes the model for the world.

As such he has all the time the eternal power that never errs; and he returns
to the limitless, a primordial nothingness.

He who knows glory, yet keeps to obscurity or even cleaves to ignominy,

turns into the valley that receives into it all kind of things. And being such
a valley he has all the time a power that suffices. So he returns again to some
pristine simplicity, returns to the state of simplicity: its the raw, uncarved
block.

Break up simple awareness and it becomes shaped. Next it becomes someones tool
in the hands of the wise man. For when a block is sawed up it's made into subordinates
or implements.

When the wise man uses it, it becomes chief.

So the greatest carver does the least cutting, as they say. The great ruler
doesn't cut up.

Know masculinity,

Maintain femininity,

and be a ravine for all under heaven.

By being a ravine for all under heaven,

Eternal integrity will never desert you.

If eternal integrity never deserts you,

You will return to the state of infancy.

Know you are innocent,

Remain steadfast when insulted,

and be a valley for all under heaven.

By being a valley for all under heaven,

Eternal integrity will suffice.

If eternal integrity suffices,

You will return to the simplicity of the unhewn log.

Know whiteness,

Maintain blackness,

and be a model for all under heaven.

By being a model for all under heaven,

Eternal integrity will not err.

If eternal integrity does not err,

You will return to infinity.

When the unhewn log is sawn apart,

it is made into tools;

When the sage is put to use,

he becomes the chief of officials.

For

Great carving does no cutting.

He who, being a man, remains a woman, will become an universal channel.

As an universal channel the eternal virtue will never forsake him. He will re-become a child.

He who, being in the light, remains in obscurity, will become an universal model.

As an universal model the eternal virtue will not pass him by. He will go back to the all-perfect.

He who, being glorious, continues in humility, will become an universal valley.

As an universal valley the eternal virtue will fill him. He will revert to the first essence.

This first essence is that which, being differentiated, gives rise to innumerable vessels of life.

A wise man, by embracing it, becomes the wisest of governors.

A liberal government is that which neither disregards not hurts anyone.

Always Return

It is good to know your strength

but always return to your flexibility.

If you can cradle your beloved in your arms

in nurturing gentleness,

love will flow through you.

It is good to achieve things

but always return to anonymity.

Your beloved does not need your achievements

but needs your uncomplicated soul.

It is good to work for change,

but always return to what is.

If you accept all things whether painful or joyful,

you will always know

that you belong to each other

and to the Tao.

Return today,

to that which brings you life:

enfolding, caressing,

soothing, nurturing,

forgiving and accepting.

He who knows the male and keeps to the female Becomes the ravine of
the world. Being the ravine of the world, He will never depart from
eternal virtue, But returns to a state of infancy.

He who knows the white and yet keeps to the black Becomes the model
for the world. Being the model for the world, He will never deviate from
eternal virtue, But returns to the state of the non-ultimate.

He who knows glory but keeps to humility Becomes the valley of the
world, He will be proficient in eternal virtue, And returns to the state
of simplicity (uncarved wood).

When the uncarved wood is broken up, it is turned into concrete
things. But when the sage uses it, he becomes the leading official.
Therefore the great ruler does not cut up.

'One who has
a man's wings

And a woman's also

Is in himself a womb of the world'

And, being a womb of the world,

Continuously, endlessly,

Gives birth;

One who, preferring light,

Prefers darkness also

Is in himself an image of the world

And, being an image of the world,

Is continuously, endlessly

The dwelling of creation;

One who is highest of men

And humblest also

Is in himself a valley of the world,

And. being a valley of the world,

Continuously, endlessly

Conducts the one source

From which vessels may be usefully filled;

Servants of the state are such vessels,

To be filled from undiminishing supply.

Knowing you can be strong, but choosing to be weak,

Is like being the creeks and streams of the world.

If you can be the creeks and streams of the world,

The DE will never leave you, and you will return to the natural state of a newborn.

Knowing you can be bright, but choosing to be dull,

Is like being the model of perfection for the world.

If you can be the model of perfection for the world,

The DE will not stray from you, and you will return to the unlimited state.

Knowing you can be glorious, but choosing to be humiliated,

Is like being the valleys and canyons of the world.

If you can be the valleys and the canyons of the world,

The DE will always be sufficient for you, and you will return to the plain and simple state.

Being simple and relaxed makes things useful, so the great men used it to lead the people.

Therefore, a great system is one that does not hurt anything.

Knowing the strength of the masculine principle,

Yet remaining in the lovingness of feminine virtue,

One becomes the stream of life to which other streams conjoin.

In thus becoming the stream of life for the world,

One comes to embody perennial virtue,

And returns to pristine innocence.

Knowing the purity of kosmic harmony,

Yet remaining in the impurity of worldly discord,

One becomes the standard of life by which other people can live.

In thus becoming the standard of life for the world,

One comes to reaffirm perennial virtue,

And returns to inner infinity.

Knowing the glory of public acclaim,

Yet remaining in the obscurity of personal humility,

One becomes the valley of life in which other people can repose.

In thus becoming the valley of life for the world,

One comes to fulfill perennial virtue,

And returns to undivided simplicity.

Undivided simplicity is reduced to mere usefulness through division.

Remaining undivided, the sage makes masterful use of the divided,

And is made the leader of an organization.

Thus, the great organization led by a sage is undivided and whole.

One keeps weakness while knowing what strength is,

And serves as the humblest brook for the world.

Being the humblest, one can receive best

Until one returns to be the weakest infant.

One keeps black while knowing what white is,

And serves as a basic model for the world.

Being the basic model, one can receive properly

Until one returns to the oneness without polar opposition.

One keeps disgrace while knowing what glory is,

And serves as the lowest valley for the world.

Being the lowest, one can receive enough

To return to the most original simplicity.

Followed by people, this simplicity can shape the world

The wise use it as the example for the government.

The big system is, therefore, an indivisible simple whole.

Know your male qualities,

Yet know how to use the female abilities.

Be like a channel for the world's waters;

Open and flowing, like the mind of a child.

Full of virtue, harmony and excellence.

Know the light,

But understand the dark.

Be an example for the world.

Act with honor, and retain humility.

Return to the state of the uncarved wooden block.

