===== Chapter 10 =====

Filling and operating Life, embracing the One

Can one be without departing [from it]?

Focusing ch'i, bringing about softness

Can one be like a newborn child?

Washing away divisions, mystically perceiving

Can one be flawless?

Loving the kingdom, governing the people

Can one do it without "doing" it?

The Heavenly Door opens, closes

Can one be receptive?

Brightening, purifying the four intelligences

Can one be without knowing?

Give birth to them. Rear them.

Giving birth [to them] but not possessing [them]

Acting [with them] but not presuming [them]

Excelling [with them] but not dominating [with them]—

This is called Mystic Virtue.

Can you balance your life force And embrace the One Without separation?

Can you control your breath Gently Like a baby?

Can you clarify Your dark vision Without blemish?

Can you love people And govern the country Without knowledge?

Can you open and close The gate of heaven Without clinging to earth?

Can you brighten The four directions Without action?

Give birth and cultivate. Give birth and do not possess. Act without
dependence. Excel but do not rule. This is called the dark Te.

Keeping your heart and your spirit together

Can you maintain their unity?

Controlling your breath and making it soft

Can you become like a newborn child?

Washing and cleansing your inner vision

Can you make it perfectly clear?

Tending the people and ruling the state

Can you refrain from interfering?

As the gates of destiny open and close

Can you play the role of the woman?

A your mind probes and explores the whole universe

Can you remain ignorant?

To give life and to nourish,

To make yet not possess,

To toil yet expect no praise,

To guide yet not dominate:

This is called the secret virtue.

CHARACTER OF TE

Can you:

Embrace oneness - Maintaining a unity of mind, body and spirit?

Control the Ch'i -

By concentration, cause it to be soft, as a little child?

Clear and purify inner mystic vision -

Spotless and without blur, creating perfection?

Govern and lead - openly, honestly and simply

The governed barely sensing your effect?

Handle "life's-gate" experiences of birth and death -

Maintaining the receptive principle of Yin?

Be open to All Things - with true understanding

Remaining detached, taking no action, not interfering?

Give birth and nourish All Things -

Seeking neither to lay claim nor possess?

Act and work -

Seeking neither credit nor reward?

Lead and assist -

Seeking neither to master nor dominate?

To do this is the primal virtue -

The profound and mysterious Te.

Hold and manage the soul of the body.

Embrace the One (the Source) with the power of not-separation!

Concentrate your chi (vital force) to attain the gentle power of a newborn infant!

Cleanse and purify your deep (inner) perception so it can be without flaws!

Cherish the people.

Govern the country with the power of emptiness!

As heaven's gate opens and closes (as life changes) retain the ability to act like a mother bird caring for her young!

Illuminate the purity of the four directions.

Open up to the power of not doing* (wu wei)!

It gives life from the Source.

It gives life and does not posses.

It acts and does not presume.

It increases and does not rule.

This speaks of the mysterious action of the soul.

* Not doing is the practice of letting your soul lead your actions by stepping back and not interfering.

THINGS ATTAINABLE

When soul and body are in the bond of love, they can be kept together.

By concentration on the breath it is brought to perfect elasticity, and one

becomes as a babe. By purifying oneself from Samadhi one becomes whole

In
his dealing with individuals and with society, let him move without

lust of result. In the management of his breath, let him be like the

mother-bird. Let his intelligence comprehend every quarter; but let his

knowledge cease.

Here
is the Mystery of Virtue. It createth all and nourisheth all; yet

it doth not adhere to them; it operateth all, but knoweth not of it, nor

proclaimeth it; it directeth all, but without conscious control.

Who finds union of mind and heart will reach immortality. Who mastershis passions and turns them to deeds of kindness, is greater than a King.Who cleanses and clears his soul becomes free of vice. Who governs in loveand justice is a benefactor even in mere contemplation. He is fearlessshould even the heavens come down. Who has insight in the depths of Times,may have not knowledge, yet supreme wisdom. To work and conserve, to workwithout greed for possessions, To work and let others use the produce,To encourage and not dominate, That I call deep virtue.

Can you empty your head and lastingly lose yourself in Creation?

Can you live up to your nature and become like a child?

Can you purify the doors of perception and see clearly again?

Can you love your fellow man and serve mankind disinterestedly?

Can you go in and out of the narrow gate without any effort?

Can you be in the world without being possessed by it?

Can you realize that you can't know anything and therefore understand everything?

Nature brings forth everything and feeds everything

She brings forth but possesses nothing

She does everything disinterestedly and asks for nothing

She leads but demands nothing

That is what people call the incomprehensibility of Nature

If you would retain a wholesome personality, must you not restrain your lower interests from dominating over your higher interests?

If you wish to live healthily, should you not breathe naturally, like a child, and not hold your breath until your vitality is nearly exhausted?

If you desire to realize the potentialities of your indescribable original nature, how can you insist that some selected aspect of your personality is really superior to that original nature?

If you are required to govern others, ought you not be able to guide them by example, rather than by forcing your will upon them?

If Nature's way is a joint process of initiation and completion, sowing and reaping, producing and consuming, can you rightly demand that you deserve always to play the role of the consumer?

If you desire to know the nature of the various kinds of things, must you meddle with them, experiment with them, try to change them, in order to find out?

Nature procreates all things and then devotes itself to caring for them, Just as parents give birth to children without keeping them as slaves. It willingly gives life, without first asking whether the creatures will repay for its services. It provides a pattern to follow, without requiring anyone to follow it. This is the secret of intelligent activity.

Can you keep the unquiet physical-soul from straying,

Hold fast to the Unity, and never quit it?

Can you, when concentrating your breath,

Make it soft like that of a little child?

Can you wipe and cleanse your vision of the Mystery till all is without blur?

Can you love the people and rule the land,

Yet remain unknown?

Can you in opening and shutting the heavenly gates play always the female part?

Can your mind penetrate every corner of the land,

But you yourself never interfere?

Rear them, then, feed them,

Rear them, but do not lay claim to them.

Control them, but never lean upon them;

Be chief among them, but do not manage them.

This is called the Mysterious Power.

While maintaining a body

can you become One?

While breathing the force of life

can you be innocent as a babe?

While polishing the dark mirror

can you be without dust?

While loving and ruling the people

can you refrain from action?

While coming and going from heaven

can you be passive as a woman?

Understanding all things

can you abide in unknowing?

Give birth and nurture.

Create without claim.

Lead without taking command.

This is supreme virtue.

(Are) shaping a soul & embracing union

Possible without separation?

(Are) concentrating the breath & attaining responsiveness

Possible (as a) newborn child?

(Are) cleansing & clearing the mystery's vision

Possible without a stain?

(Are) caring for people & ruling a realm

Possible without interfering?

(Are) opening & closing the gates of heaven

Possible playing the woman?

(Are) clarifying & simplifying the four directions

Possible without knowledge?

Create things & care for them

Create but do not possess

Act but do not expect

Lead but do not rule

These may be called "mystical powers"

Love

In nourishing the soul and embracing the One,

Can you do it without letting them leave?

In concentrating your breath and making it soft,

Can you make it like that of a newborn babe?

In cultivating and cleaning your profound vision,

Can you do it so that you stay without stain?

In loving the people and giving life to the country,

Can you be without cleverness?

In opening and closing the gates of Heaven,

Can you play the role of woman?

In understanding and being open to all within the four reaches,

Can you do it without using knowledge?

Give birth to them and nourish them,

Give birth to them, but don't try to own them,

Help them to grow, but don't rule them,

This is called the Profound Virtue.

Can you marry your spirit and body to the oneness and never depart from it?

Can you ride your breath until your entire being is as supple as the body of an infant?

Can you cleanse your inner vision until you see heaven in every direction?

Can you love the people and govern them without conniving and manipulating?

Can you bear heaven's children in all that you do and are?

Can you give the wisdom of your heart precedence over the learning of your head?

Giving birth, nourishing life, shaping things without possessing them, serving without expectation of reward, leading without dominating: These are the profound virtues of nature, and of nature's best things.

Nourish every sense,

Embrace your undivided nature.

Let your chi course fresh and fluid

With the iridescence of a newborn body.

Cleanse guilt and shame-the mud of culture-

From all your being,

And feel your natural form.

Let yourself be led by the fearless love

Of a caring Cosmos.

Close the gates of Heaven,

Abandon manipulation,

Open yourself to the perfect nature

That has always been there.

Release the Sage within you

And let your clarity extend

To every corner of the universe.

Then may your words and actions

Nourish, develop, and sustain

Others as well as yourself.

When you realize that there is nothing to claim,

Nothing to assert,

Nothing to control,

Nothing to dominate;

This is called the actualization of Modesty.

Can you control your mind

so that it never strays from the way of Tao?

Can you control your breathing

so that it is soft and gentle

like a new-born babe?

Can
you purify yourself

so that you are perfect?

Can you love all the people,

rule them, and remain unknown?

And do so without interference?

Can you play the same role always?

Give
birth, provide nourishment;

do this without being possessive.

Give help without obligation.

Lead without dominating.

This is the Mytic Virtue (Teh).

By steadily disciplining the animal nature, until it becomes one pointed, it is possible to establish the Indivisible.

By undivided attention to the soul, rendering it passive, it is possible to become as an infant child.

By purifying the mind of phantasms, it is possible to become without fault.

By perfecting the people, and pacifying the empire, it is possible to prove non-attachment.

By functioning on the super-physical planes, it is possible to be independent of the lower mind.

By making intuition omniscient, it is impossible to discard knowledge.

Producing! Nourishing! Developing, without self-consciousness! Acting, without seeking the fruit!

Progressing, without thinking of growth! This is the abyss of energy.

Can you keep the soul always concentrated from straying?

Can you regulate the breath and become soft and pliant like an infant?

Can you clear and get rid of the unforeseen and be free from fault?

Can you love the people and govern the state by non-action?

Can you open and shut the gates of nature like a female?

Can you become enlightened and penetrate everywhere without knowledge?

Impossible Advice

In general:

In mustering your vitalities, embracing in one, can you fail to distinguish?

In specializing in breath and consummating weakness, can you be a child?

In cleansing and voiding your profound mirror, can you be without flaw?

In loving the people and ordering the state, can you fail to know?

In opening and closing the heavenly channel, can you fail to be female?

In discerning all within the four directions, can you fail to deem-act?

Generate it, nourish it:

Generate it and not 'exist' it.

Deem: act and not rely on anything.

Become 'elder' and not rule.

These are called 'profound virtuosities.'

Can you unify hun and p'o into one and not let them be divided?

Can you concentrate on your breathing to reach harmony and become as an innocent babe?

Can you clean the dark mirror within yourself and let nothing remain there?

Can you love the people and govern the state and do so without interference?

Can you enter and leave the realm of Non-being and let these actions take place by themselves?

Can the clear illumination radiate to all directions without your having knowledge of it?

Cultivate it, and nourish it,

Produce it, but do not possess it,

Labor on it, but do not depend on it,

Lead it, but do not manage it.

This is called the mystic attainment.

Can one hold the soul in the body, hold the mind in the spirit, and keep them as one?

Can one concentrate the energy of life and keep it supple like a newborn child?

Can one study everything and really know everything without making a mistake?

Can one govern the nation with all the right actions and really love the people?

Can one always make a decision with the right mind?

Can one empty the mind and fill it with the brightness of wisdom and learn to step back from this knowledge?

Can one give life and grow life and yet claim no possession?

Can one supervise and benefit others, yet exercise no authority and rely on no pride?

This is what is called the mysterious virtue.

In making your soul embrace One,

Can you keep it from departing?

In concentrating your breath to make it utterly soft,

Can you do so as an infant does?

In cleaning and dusting the deep and remote mirror,

Can you make it spotless?

In loving the people and governing the state,

Can you practice nonaction?

In opening and closing the heavenly gate,

Can you play the feminine?

In keeping clear-sighted and all-perceptive,

Can you refrain from using craft?

Generate them;

Rear them.

Generate without possessing;

Lead without dominating -

This is called deep and remote virtue.

Can you always keep your soul focused

So that nothing can divert it from the Tao?

Can you regulate your breathing

And be as soft and relaxed as a baby?

Can you purify yourself and eliminate the hidden

So that you are free of all blemish and error?

Can you love the people and govern the state by non-action?

Can you open and close the gates of nature

As a woman can?

Can you be enlightened and aware

And penetrate to the depths of everything, without knowledge?

When carrying on your head your perplexed bodily soul

Can you embrace in your arms the One and not let go?

In concentrating your breath can you become as supple

As a babe?

Can you polish your mysterious mirror

And leave no blemish?

Can you love the people and govern the state

Without resorting to action?

When the gates of heaven open and shut

Are you capable of keeping to the role of the female?

When your discernment penetrates the four quarters

Are you capable of not knowing anything?

It
gives them life and rears them.

It
gives them life yet claims no possession;

It benefits them yet exacts no gratitude;

It is the steward yet exercises no authority.

Such is called the mysterious virtue.

What Can Be Done?

Who by unending discipline of the senses embraces unity cannot be disintegrated. By concentrating his vitality and inducing tenderness he can become like a little child. By purifying, by cleansing and profound intuition he can be free from faults.

Who loves the people when administering the country will practise nonassertion.

Opening and closing the gates of heaven, he will be like a mother-bird; bright, and white, and penetrating the four quarters, he will be unsophisticated. He quickens them and feeds them. He quickens but owns not. He acts but claims not. He excels but rules not. This is called profound virtue.

To keep the mind balanced use the body. Breathe like an infant. Then cleanse the mind by letting go of ideas. Love people without interfering. Allow events to take their natural course. Detached from comings and goings the mind is clear. Don't bullshit yourself! By balancing it you nurture it, but it is not yours. Acting through it, but expecting no results. Perfection comes of its own accord.

Unite physically and mentally to embrace One.

Can one be not separated from it?

Channel energy toward tenderness.

Can one emulate the infant?

Cleanse the deep mirror within.

Can one be without blemishes?

Love the populace in governance.

Can one practice laissez-faire?

Open and close the cosmic portal.

Can one assume the feminine role?

Discern and deliberate.

Can one be ignorant?

Cultivate, rear.

Cultivate, but possess not;

Provide, but claim not;

Nurture, but dominate not.

This is the Profoundest virtue.

Can you let your spirit embrace primal unity without drifting away?

Can you focus ch'i into such softness you're a newborn again?

Can you polish the dark-enigma mirror to a clarity beyond stain?

Can you make loving the people and ruling the nation nothing's own doing?

Can you be female opening and closing heaven's gate?

Can you fathom earth's four distances with radiant wisdom and know nothing?

Give birth and nurture.

Give birth without possessing and foster without dominating:

this is called dark-enigma Integrity.

Command your body and soul to embrace the One,

Can there be no separation?

Concentrate your vital energy to achieve complete softness,

Can you be like an infant?

Cleanse your thoughts and purify your insight,

Can you be flawless?

In loving your people and governing your state,

Can you be without preconception?

In opening and closing the gate of Heaven,

Can you behave like a female?

In comprehending and penetrating the truth,

Can you be mindful of taking no action against Tao?

In producing and in nurturing lives, you are:

To produce, but not to possess;

To care for, but not to control;

To lead, but not to subjugate.

This is known as the profound virtue.

In
containing life-force and embracing oneness

Is the ability to be absent from departing equal?

In gently extending animus alone

Is the ability to be as a newborn child equal?

In cleansing and clearing insightful discernment

Is the ability to be absent of flaws equal?

In fondness for people, governing a nation

Is the ability to be absent of action equal?

In opening and closing the gate of heavens

Is the ability to be absent of femaleness equal?

In seeing clearly all four reaches

Is the ability to be absent from knowledge equal?

Be
giving birth, be nourishing.

Giving
birth yet without possessing

Acting yet without sustaining

Growing yet without directing

Is appropriately called insightful ideal.

Keep your body and spermatic soul closely united, and ensure that they do not become separated.

Apply yourself such that the air you breath in, converted into the aerial soul, animates this composite, and keeps it intact as in a new-born baby.

Withhold yourself from considerations which are too profound, in order not to wear yourself out.

As for love of the people and anxiety for the state, limit yourself to non-action.

Let the gates of heaven open and close, without wishing to do something, without interfering.

Know all, be informed on everything, and for all that remain indifferent, as if you knew nothing.

Produce, breed, without taking any credit for what has been produced, without exacting a return for your actions, without imposing yourself on those you govern. There you have the formula for transcendent action.

In holding the soul and embracing oneness

Can one be without straying?

In concentrating the energy and reaching relaxation

Can one be like an infant?

In cleaning away the worldly view

Can one be without imperfections?

In loving the people and ruling the nation

Can one be without manipulation?

In the heavenly gate's opening and closing

Can one hold to the feminine principle?

In understanding clearly all directions

Can one be without intellectuality?

Bearing it, rearing it

Bearing without possession

Achieving without arrogance

Raising without domination

This is called the mystic virtue

In holding to your inner essence and embracing the oneness of your being, can your mind avoid being distracted, and thus going astray?

In focusing on your ch'i (the "breath", or the living energy that courses through the body) and reaching a relaxed, softened state, can you identify with the purity of a newborn child?

In cleansing and getting rid of all the diversions of the materialistic panorama, can you be completely without any lingering attachments?

In caring for the people and governing a nation, can you administer without resorting to manipulative tricks?

When the gateway to the soul opens, the mind is in motion; when it closes, the mind at rest. In the opening and closing of this gateway, can you grasp the yin principle of serenity and quietude?

In approaching a true understanding that reaches out in all directions and encompasses all corners of the world, can you let go of the false knowledge gained through rationalization and intellectual sophistry?

The Tao gives birth to everything and nurtures everything, but does so without becoming possessive.

Creation is full of wondrous and marvelous works of nature. The Tao is the force behind them, and yet does not become presumptuous in such achievements. It gives life every chance to develop and thrive, and yet does not become domineering or controlling because of that.

We call this attribute the mystic virtue. Sages emulate it in their every action. They nurture, encourage, teach and mentor those around them without the need to possess, gloat, or dominate.

Notes

The line "Can one be without straying?" refers to straying from the path of centered oneness. Some translations render "straying" as "separation" or "division," thus obscuring the original meaning and making the line more difficult to understand.

The line "In loving the people and ruling the nation" may seem to be directed at kings and emperors, but actually addresses the individual as well. Think of a kingdom as a metaphor for your workplace, family, social circle, sports team, and even your immediate surroundings, and the practical utility of this section becomes clear.

WHAT IS POSSIBLE

By patience the animal spirits can be disciplined. By self-control one can unify the character. By close attention to the will, compelling gentleness, one can become like a little child. By purifying the subconscious desires one may be without fault. In ruling his country, if the wise magistrate loves his people, he can avoid compulsion.

In measuring out rewards, the wise magistrate will act like a mother bird. While sharply penetrating into every corner, he may appear to be unsuspecting. While quickening and feeding his people, he will be producing but without pride of ownership. He will benefit but without claim of reward. He will persuade, but not compel by force. This is teh, the profoundest virtue.

In bringing your spiritual (ying) and bodily (p'o) souls to embrace the One,

Can (neng) you never depart (li) from it?

In concentrating your breath to attain softness,

Can you be like an infant (ying erh)?

In cleansing your mirror (lan) of the dark (hsüan),

Can you make it spotless?

In opening and closing heaven's gate (t'ien men),

Can you be the female (tz'u)?

In being enlightened (ming) and comprehending all,

Can you do it without knowledge?

In loving the people and governing the state,

Can you practice non-action?

To give birth, to nurture,

To give birth yet not to claim possession (yu),

To act (wei) yet not to hold on to,

To grow (chang) yet not to lord over (tsai),

This is called the dark virtue (yüan te).

Can you control your mind so that it never strays from the way of Tao?

Can you control your breathing so that it is soft and gentle like a new-born babe?

Can you purify yourself so that you are perfect? Can you love all the people, rule them, and remain unknown? And do so without interference?

Can you play the same role always?

Give birth; provide nourishment; do this without being possessive. Give help without obligation. Lead without dominating. This is the Mystic Virtue (Teh).

Can you keep body and soul together

and find your wholeness in the One?

Can you make your breathing as soft as a newborn child's?

Can you cleanse your inner vision

until you see with perfect clarity?

Can you love the people and govern the country without ado?

Can you, like a woman, open and close the gates of Heaven?

Can you understand all things and take no action?

Giving birth and nourishing, having but not owning,

acting without seeking praise, leading but not dominating:

this is the highest virtue [Te].

Ten

Carrying body and soul and embracing the one,

Can you avoid separation?

Attending fully and becoming supple,

Can you be as a newborn babe?

Washing and cleansing the primal vision,

Can you be without stain?

Loving all men and ruling the country,

Can you be without cleverness?

Opening and closing the gates of heaven,

Can you play the role of woman?

Understanding and being open to all things,

Are you able to do nothing?

Giving birth and nourishing,

Bearing yet not possessing,

Working yet not taking credit,

Leading yet not dominating,

This is the Primal Virtue.

Body and soul are one,

But can they avoid separation?

Though concentrating on breathing exercises to be supple,

Can you become as supple as a baby?

Though getting rid of your distracting thoughts for a deeper meditation,

Can you be devoid of blemish?

If you are to love the people and govern a state,

Can you avoid taking active action?

When the door of heaven opens or closes,

Can you remain inactive as a female?

When your power of perception penetrates every corner,

Are you capable of knowing nothing?

Giving all things life and propagation

Without claiming to be their owner,

Benefiting them without claiming to be their benefactor,

And being their head without ruling them,

All these are called the most intrinsic Teh (virtue).

Rest your shining spirit and embrace the One.

Can you forever hold onto it?

Concentrate your breath and attain the utmost softness.

Can you become a baby?

Clean your mysterious mirror.

Can you keep it free of blemish?

Love the people and keep the state in peace.

Can you rule through no-action?

As the gate of Heaven opens and closes,

Can you play the female part?

As bright light reaches all four directions,

Can you remain unknowing?

To give people life and nurture them;

To give them life, without possessing them;

To rule them, without depending on them;

To lead them, without directing them -

This is called the mysterious Te.

In maintaining congruity of the mind and body,

Can you prevent your attention from wandering?

Can you breathe naturally and relax your entire body

Until it becomes as supple as an infant's?

Can you clear all errant thoughts and maintain an immaculate mind?

Can you rule benevolently by adhering to non-action?

In watching everything evolve and change, are you able to maintain quietude (a typical female trait)?

Can you learn intuitively rather than analytically?

Dao procreates and nourishes everything.

It engenders but does not claim possession.

It achieves but does not claim credit.

It lets things develop but does not exert control.

This is known as "inconspicuous virtue".

It Can Be Done

Neng Wei

In harmonizing your hun and p'o to embrace the One,

Can you concentrate without deviating?

In attuning your breath to induce tenderness,

Can you become like a new-born babe?

In cleansing and purifying your Mystic Mirror,

Can you make it free from all stain?

In loving the people and ruling the state,

Can you practice non-interference?

When the Heavenly Gate opens and closes,

Can you play the part of the Female?

When your light shines forth in all directions,

Can you ignore it with perfect equanimity?

To produce things and nourish them,

To produce but not to claim ownership,

To act but not to presume on the result,

To lead but not to manipulate, -

This is called Mystic Virtue.

Can you control the restless physical-being and at the same time hold fast to the Oneness of the Universe?

Can you so regulate your breathing that is becomes soft and effortless like a child's?

Can you sponge away the dust from the surface of the Mysterious Mirror, leaving nothing obscure?

Can you love the people and govern the country while remaining yourself unknown?

Can you, opening and shutting Nature's gates, remain passive, playing the woman's part?

Can you penetrate all quarters and understand all creatures, and yet not interfere?

Very well then: Quicken them, nourish them;

Give life to htem, but make no claim on them;

Govern them, but do not be dependent on them;

Be chief among them, but do not order them about.

This is to use the Mysterious Power.

In maintaining the vital spirit,

Can you hold to oneness

And not come apart

In developing the vital senses,

Can you be like an infant child?

In loving the people and ruling the state,

Can you hold to nothing-knowing?

In opening and closing heaven's gate,

Can you act like a mother bird?

While seeing clearly in the four directions,

Can you hold to nothing-doing?

Rear the people,

Feed the people.

Rear them but don't own them.

Work but don't claim;

Lead but don't butcher.

Call this inward virtue.

Can you always embrace Oneness without the slightest separation of body and mind?

Can you maintain undivided concentration until your vital force is as supple as a newborn baby's?

Can you clarify your inner vision to be flawless?

Can you love your people and serve your state with no self-exaltation?

As Life's Gate opens and closes in the performance of birth and death,

can you maintain the receptive, feminine principle when yin and yang are changing?

After achieving the crystal clear mind,

can you remain detached and innocent?

Give birth to and nourish all things without desiring to possess them.

Give of yourself, without expecting something in return.

Assist people, but do not attempt to control them.

This is how to realize the deep virtue of the universe.

X.

Ability
to Do

One
can keep the camp whole of the animal soul, by embracing the One alone,

Can
bring tenderness by guarding the breath, and be as an infant child,

One
can wash and be clean, and, knowing the deep, can be spotless and undefiled,

And,
loving the people can rule the land with a rule that is scarcely shown.

Can one
not open and close his heavenly gates like a bird on her nest?

When
his intellect broadens on every side may its light not remain unknown?

Quickening,
feeding, producing,
must
he still claim the fruit as
his own?

To
uplift all, and yet rule not, is virtue the deepest and best.

Bring soul and spirit into unity, they will become welded in the Inner Life.

Conquer vital force until it yields to you, you will become as a new-born child.

Purify the channels of deep perception, you will dwell safely in the Inner Life.

Govern a kingdom by loving the people, they will learn to act from the Inner Life.

Open and shut the doors of heaven, you will have repose of mind in active life.

Let your purity shine forth in all directions, men will see that you have an Inner Life.

Give it birth, nourish it,

Give it birth, but do not seek to possess.

Act but do not appropriate.

Endure but do not rule.

That is called profound Teh.

In
keeping the spirit

and
the vital soul

together,

Are
you able to

maintain
their perfect blending?

Breath
gently

and
become newborn.

Clear
your inner vision,

and
become clear.

In
loving your people and

governing
your state,

Are
you able to

be
impartial?

In
opening and shutting

of
heaven's gate(your heart),

you
become

accepted.

Enlightened
and

seeing

far
into all directions,

Can
you at the same time

remain
not involved and

not
interfere?

Raise
your people with care!

Feed
your people!

Raise
them without saying

they
are your own!

Do
your work

without
setting

any
value to it!

Be
one to be followed,

not
one who commands!

This
is called Hidden Powers.

This
is true harmony.

By clinging to the One with both your spiritual and physical souls, can you prevent them from becoming divorced?

By concentrating your breath until you become soft, can you be like an infant?

By cleansing your secret mirror, can you make it without blemish?

In loving the people and ruling a state, can you be without action?

In opening and closing the natural gates, can you be like a hen?

In penetrating the four quarters with your intelligence, can you be without knowledge?

When the intelligent and animal souls are held together in one

embrace, they can be kept from separating. When one gives undivided

attention to the (vital) breath, and brings it to the utmost degree of

pliancy, he can become as a (tender) babe. When he has cleansed away

the most mysterious sights (of his imagination), he can become without

a flaw.

In
loving the people and ruling the state, cannot he proceed

without any (purpose of) action? In the opening and shutting of his

gates of heaven, cannot he do so as a female bird? While his

intelligence reaches in every direction, cannot he (appear to) be

without knowledge?

(The
Tao) produces (all things) and nourishes them; it produces

them and does not claim them as its own; it does all, and yet does not

boast of it; it presides over all, and yet does not control them.

This is what is called 'The mysterious Quality' (of the Tao).

While:
Cultivating the Soul and embracing it's Source-Twin,
can
you keep them from seeming 'seperate?'
Focusing
your breath into gossamer-like serenity,
can you still be as simple as a
baby's Libido?
Cleansing
the mirror of mysteries,
can you locate and remove your own illusions?
Loving
people and uplifting the society,
can you do so without being 'cunning?'

Opening
and closing the Cave of Impressions,
can you remain The Bride Of Heaven?

Reaching-out
with clarity in all directions,
can you refrain from acting 'personally?'

THOU
gives birth to them and nurtures them.
THOU gives birth to them but does
not 'own' them.
THOU rears them but does not 'command' them.
This is
called 'Motherly Virtue.'

Can
you see as a child sees

And keep the simple vision?

See the inner oneness

With absolute precision

Hold
all things in your embrace

The entire world is in your care

Let things be just as they are

Extend acceptance everywhere

Let
go all need to comprehend

The truth is here where all behold

Their infinite capacity

To welcome and enfold

IN keeping the spirit and the vital soul together,

Are you able to maintain their perfect harmony?

In gathering your vital energy to attain suppleness,

Have you reached the state of a new-bom babe?

In washing and clearing your inner vision,

Have you purified it of all dross?

In loving your people and governing your state,

Are you able to dispense with cleverness?

In the opening and shutting of heaven's gate,

Are you able to play the feminine part?

Enlightened and seeing far into all directions,

Can you at the same time remain detached and non-active?

Rear your people!

Feed your people!

Rear them without claiming them for your own!

Do your work without setting any store by it!

Be a leader, not a butcher!

This is called hidden Virtue.

Can you coax your mind from its wandering...and still yourself?:

Are you able to avoid separation from creation?

Focusing your energy on oneness with all:

Can you be like a child?

Can you cleanse your inner vision,

until you see nothing but the light?

Can you love people and lead them,

without imposing your will?

Can you deal with the most vital matters

by letting events take their course?

Can you step back from your own notions

and understand all things?

The Tao Gives birth and nourishes,

it produces, but it does not possess.

The Tao acts with no expectations.

Be like the Tao: surpass, but don't take charge.

This is called The Mysterious Virtue.

Nurture the darkness of your soul

until you become whole.

Can you do this and not fail?

Can you focus your life-breath until you become

supple as a newborn child?

While you cleanse your inner vision

will you be found without fault?

Can you love people and lead them

without forcing your will on them?

When Heaven gives and takes away

can you be content with the outcome?

When you understand all things

can you step back from your own understanding?

Giving
birth and nourishing,

making without possessing,

expecting nothing in return.

To grow, yet not to control:

This is the mysterious virtue.

Can you mediate emotional issues without taking sides or picking favourites?

Can you breathe freely and remained relaxed even in the presence of passionate fears and desires?

Are your own conflicts clarified? Is your own house clean?

Can you be gentle with all factions and lead the group without dominating?

Can you remain open and receptive, no matter what issues arise?

Can you know what is emerging, yet keep your peace while others discover for themselves?

Learn to lead in a nourishing manner.

Learn to lead without being positive.

Learn to be helpful without taking the credit.

Learn to lead without coercion.

You can do this if you remain unbiased, clear, and down-to-earth.

Being both body and spirit,

can you embrace unity and not be fragmented?

Being spiritually focused,

can you become soft, like a newborn baby?

Being clear in mind and vision,

can you eliminate your flaws?

Loving All people and leading them well,

can you do this without imposing your will?

When Heaven gives and takes away,

can you be content to just let things come or go?

And even when you understand All things,

can you simply allow yourself to be?

To give birth and nourish,

To make and not own,

To act but not expect something in return,

To grow, yet not demand this of others,

This is the virtue of Mystery.

Manifesting
body, mind and spirit,

can you stay centered in the oneness of

Infinity?

Fully
manifesting and remaining flexible,

can you experience all manifestations

as a newborn baby?

Can
you maintain the Infinite vision of oneness

by ignoring distinctions.

Remaining
centered in oneness and leading others,

can you avoid manifesting arrogance?

Entering
and exiting the gates of manifestations,

can you harmonize with Infinity?

Realizing
your oneness with Infinity,

can you flow in harmony with It

by indifferently allowing things to come and

go?

Can
you create and sustain things,

and yet remain unattached to them?

Can
you work in harmony with all things,

without desiring acknowledgment for your

deeds?

Exemplifying
oneness,

flowing in peace and harmony,

not distinguishing, not judging,

is the nature of Infinity.

Nourish your Spirit; can you accept all things without distinction ?

Focus your energy; can you be pliant as a new-born babe ?

Dispel the darkness; can you observe without criticizing ?

Love the people; can you govern without Knowledge ?

Reach Heaven's gate; can you do it without gentleness ?

Understand the goal; can you succeed without action ?

Produce and save.

Create and do not possess.

Govern, and do not exploit.

Lead, and do not kill.

This is Mystic Virtue.

Can you embrace the oneness of everything with body and soul

Without being distracted?

When concentrating your breath to bring about softness,

Can you be like a baby?

Can you clean your profound mirror and make it free from blemish?1

Can you love the people and rule the country

Yet be without knowledge?

When the gates of Heaven open and close2

Can you keep to the role of the female?3

When your intelligence has penetrated to the four corners

Can you refrain from acting?

To produce things and nourish them;

To bring them forth without possessing them;

To benefit them without reward,

And lead without imposing,

Is called profound Virtue.

1. this may allude to a meditation technique. The 'profound mirror' is a simile for the mind; making it 'free from blemish' is to avoid making emotional responses to the events and circumstances of the everyday world.

2. perhaps, simply, 'when things happen'.

3. i.e. remain passive and refrain from acting.

How is it

That you hold your soul and body together?

Is it like a quiet infant

That you soften your breath?

Is it without any dust

That you clear your mind as a metaphysical mirror?

Is it without willful actions

That you love and take care of your country and people?

Is it without any dark corner

That you sense what is happening in the world?

Is it without misguiding knowledge

That you understand the whole world?

The metaphysical getter is one

That lets be everything that is born,

Produces without possessing anything surplus,

Achieves successes without being proud of them,

And rules well without any executive power.

When 'carrying your soul,' embracing the One Thing, can you be undivided?

When 'concentrating ch'i', bringing about Softness, can you be like an infant?

When 'cleansing and purifying the mysterious mirror,' can you be without blemish?

When 'loving the people and caring for the kingdom,' can you be without knowledge?

When 'the Doors of Heaven open and shut,' can you remain Feminine?

When 'Clarity and bareness penetrate everywhere,' can you remain not doing?

Produce and nourish. Produce but don't possess work but don't rely on this preside but don't rule. This is mysterious Te.

In order to maintain calm, one has to feel the Unity with Everything*. Then one does not develop false egocentric desires.

One has to refine the consciousness. Let man become in this respect to a newborn baby. He who became so subtle becomes free from delusions.**

One has to rule the country and people with love for them and without violence.

The gate from the world of matter to the hidden world is open when one stays in calm. Understanding of this truth comes in non-doing.

To educate without violence, to create without boasting, to produce without possessing the products, to be older than others and do not command them: this is the true righteousness of the Great Te***!

* Feeling of being an integral part of the Absolute.

** Only through this one can cognize Tao.

*** The higher morality suggested by Te — the Holy Spirit (Brahman).

Can we join our heart with Tao?

Can we follow the Tao Way?

Can we breathe calm like a child?

Can we see the light in what we do in life?

Can we lead and love people

In the subtle way of Non-action?

Can we master ourselves

And be able to create possibilities at will?

Can we learn to access everything

By mastering the Tao Way?

Can we be creative and nourishing?

Can we free ourselves form the urge of possessing?

Can we do good without waiting for reward?

Can we lead without oppressing people?

He who is able to do all these

Is the master of the great Virtue (Te).

Nurture
the dark soul and embrace unity. Can you do so without fail? Focus the lifebreath,
making it as supple as possible. Can you in so doing be like an infant? In cleaning
up the dark and mysterious vision, can you be without defect? In loving the
people and ordering the kingdom, can you be without forceful activity. In the
opening and closing of the portal of heaven, can you play the female part? Although
your awareness reaches to all points, can you yet remain without the use of
knowledge?

Give
birth to them, nurture them. And yet while giving birth to them do not possess
them and while acting (i.e., nurturing) claim no credit. Though senior to them
do not rule over them. This is called the dark and mysterious virtue.

Keeping one's ying poh and embracing the One,

Can man not depart from it?

Breathing intensely to induce softness,

Can man be like an infant?

The mystic vision being pure and clean,

Can it be without flaw?

Loving the people and governing the state,

Can man be without action?

Opening and closing the gate of heaven,

Can it not be the female?

Discerning and understanding the four corners,

Can man do so without knowledge?

To produce and to raise;

To produce without possessing;

To act without asserting;

To develop without controlling;

This is called the profound virtue.

Inner Harmony

In managing your instincts and embracing Oneness,

Can you be undivided?

In focusing your Influence,

Can you yield as a newborn child?

In clearing your insight,

Can you become free of error?

In loving people and leading the organization,

Can you take no action?

In opening and closing the gateway to nature,

Can you not weaken?

In seeing clearly in all directions,

Can you be wtihout knowledge?

Produce things, cultivate things;

Produce but do not possess.

Act without expectation.

Advance without dominating.

These are called the Subtle Powers.

The sun and moon will rise each day. We do not meddle. Have a nice home, but do not possess it. Give to those in need, but do not wait for a thank you. Show your family happiness without forcing them to your defined path of happiness. This is the ultimate virtue.

Can you govern your animal soul, hold to the One and

never
depart from it?

Can you throttle your breath, down to the softness of

breath in a child?

Can you purify your mystic vision and wash it until it is

spotless?

Can you love all your people, rule over the land without

being known?

Can you be like a female, and passively open and shut

heaven's gates?

Can you keep clear in your mind the four quarters of earth

and not interfere?

Quicken
them, feed them;

Quicken but do not possess them.

Act and be independent;

Be the chief but never the lord:

This describes the mystic virtue.

Can you keep the unity of soul and the body without separating them?

Can you concentrate the vital energy, keep the breath and achieve gentleness like an infant without any desires?

Can you cleanse and purify your profound insight without any flecks?

Can you love the people and govern the state without personal knowledge?

Can you recoil to take the feminine position in the course of Nature's opposition and change?

Can you perceive all and comprehend all without taking any action?

To let all things grow and increase,

To beget all things, but not to take possession of them,

To advance them, but not to take credit for doing so,

To be leader but not master of them,

- This is the most profound De (Te, or Virtue)

Stay where your earthbound soul is protected, and embrace integrity: can you do this with never a deviation?

Rely exclusively on your vital force, and become perfectly soft: can you play the infant?

Cleanse your vision into the mystery of things: can you make it spotless?

Cherish the people and govern the state: can you do this without intelligence?

The gateway of Heaven, whether it is to be open or shut: can you play the female?

Your bright understanding casts its light over the four quarters: can you stay free of conscious effort?

He gives them life

And nurtures them.

He gives them life, yet he possesses them not.

He acts, yet does not make them dependent.

He matures them, yet he is not their steward.

This we call mysterious virtue.

1. In nourishing the soul and embracing the One—can you do it without letting
them leave?

2. In concentrating your breath and making it soft—can you [make it like that
of] a child?

3. In cultivating and cleaning your profound mirror—can you do it so that it
has no blemish?

4. In loving the people and giving life to the state—can you do it without using
knowledge?

5. In opening and closing the gates of Heaven—can you play the part of the female?

6. In understanding all within the four reaches—can you do it without using
knowledge?

7.
Give birth to them and nourish them.

8. Give birth to them but don't try to own them;

9. Help them to grow but don't rule them.

10. This is called Profound Virtue.

Can you hold
on to your ego

and still stay focused on Tao?

Can you relax your mind and body

and brace yourself for a new life?

Can you check yourself

and see past what's in front of your eyes?

Can you be a leader

and not try to prove you're in charge?

Can you deal with what's happening

and let it happen?

Can you forget what you know

and understand what's real?

Starting a job
and seeing it through,

Having things without holding on to them,

Doing the job without expecting anything,

Delegating authority without giving orders.

That's the way you do it.

Mystical Power

Can you embrace the One with your soul,

and never depart from the Way?

Can you concentrate your vital force

to achieve the gentleness of a new-born baby?

Can you cleanse and purify your mystic vision

until it is clear?

Can you love the people and govern the state

without interfering?

Can you play the role of the female

in opening and closing the doors of heaven?

Can you understand all and penetrate all

without using the mind?

To give birth and to nourish,

to give birth without taking possession,

to act without obligation,

to lead without dominating---

this is mystical power.

He who knows himself to be one with all in spirit and mind is safe from division and discord.

He who practicing gentleness purifies his senses and soul becomes like a new-born child heir to heaven.

He who striving for clarity looks inside attains insight and the perceptions of truth.

He who leads others through love himself remaining serene brings about order without giving orders.

Since giving and receiving are one to him he opens all the gates of heaven like the maternal World Spirit.

Because he himself is inwardly open everything is open to him without learning.

That he nourishes and sustains without holding that he acts without keeping back and retaining that he leads without dominating: such is the virtue of the Supreme Man.

Embracing The True One

Lao Tze says,

By clothing a good frame and embracing the holy one, cannot your soul be kept from leaving?

In concentrating the breath and making the body supple, can't you turn into a baby again?

By taking the eyes' dirt and consulting scriptures, can't you become blemishless?

To love people and exercise government, can't this be kept from being publicly known?

Cannot your mouths, eyes, and ears, the gate of Heaven remain soft when opening and closing as females usually do?

When you understand the truth and fully discern them, do you not depend on acting without the intent to control fate?

The one which gives all things' lives, and thus rears them, gives the lives, but does not claim ownership;

it works laboriously for them, but does not expect reward in return.

Even when they are fully grown up, it does not dominate them.

I shall say this really can be regarded as the mystic virtue.

CLEANING THE DARK MIRROR

Maintaining
unity is virtuous,

for the inner world of thought is one

with the external world

of action and of things.

The
sage avoids their separation,

by breathing as the sleeping babe,

and thus maintaining harmony.

He
cleans the dark mirror of his mind,

so that it reflects without intent.

He conducts himself without contriving,

loving the people, and not interfering.

He
cultivates without possessing,

thus providing nourishment,

he remains receptive

to changing needs,

and creates without desire.

By
leading from behind,

attending to that

which must be done,

he is said to have attained

the mystic state.

Can you coax your mind from its wandering

and keep to the original oneness?

Can you let your body become

supple as a newborn child's?

Can you cleanse your inner vision

until you see nothing but the light?

Can you love people and lead them

without imposing your will?

Can you deal with the most vital matters

by letting events take their course?

Can you step back from you own mind

and thus understand all things?

Giving birth and nourishing,

having without possessing,

acting with no expectations,

leading and not trying to control:

this is the supreme virtue.

By keeping the body and soul balanced, they can not be split.

By soft breathing and being tender, one can be innocent.

By purifying the mind and broadening views, one can be free from errors.

By loving the people and serving the country, one should not interfere.

If one's mind is indecisive, one should make it inactive.

By thoroughly understanding all angles, one can discard dogmatism.

It gives life, nourishes them.

It produces all things but it does not possess them.

It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.

It leads them but does not lord over them.

This is called the "incomprehensive Virtues".

Donning the spirit and soul, and drawing them into Oneness,

Can this come apart?

Gathering in Qi and making the body supple,

Is this not an infant?

Being clear-headed and eliminating any mystic vision,

Can even a speck exist?

Loving the people and governing the country,

Is this not inactive?

Opening and closing the Gate of Heaven,

Is this not the female?

Comprehending the four corners of the world,

Is this not knowledge?

Begetting and nourishing,

Begetting but not possessing,

Enhancing but not dominating.

This is Mysterious Action.

X

Feed
your emotions, but balance them

Breathe fully and effortlessly, like a child

See who you are, without distortion

Love
your nation and your people, without prejudgment

Live the feminine principle, so the tao possesses you

See the world as it is, without interpretation

Be
a womb to things, and a breast

Give them life, but let them be

Nurture them without demands

This
is virtue

Carrying Vitality and Consciousness

Carrying vitality and consciousness,

embracing them as one,

can you keep them from parting?

Concentrating energy,

making it supple,

can you be like an infant?

Purifying hidden perception,

can you make it flawless?

Loving the people, governing the nation,

can you be uncontrived?

As the gate of heaven opens and closes,

can you be impassive?

As understanding reaches everywhere,

can you be innocent?

Producing and developing,

producing without possessing,

doing without presuming,

growing without domineering:

this is called mysterious power.

Can you keep your mind and your action consistent?

Can you be simple and sincere like a baby?

Can you view things without bias?

Can you govern without imposing your will?

Can you be moderate in daily business?

Can you keep open mind when learning?

Birth and growth are natural.

Do not think birth is someone's achievements.

Do not be vainglorious for your accomplishments.

Do not impede growth.

This is called the profound virtue.

In keeping the spirit and the vital soul together, are you able to maintain their perfect harmony?

In gathering your vital energy to attain suppleness, are you able to play the role of a newborn babe?

In washing and clearing the mysterious mirror, are you able to purify it of all dross?

In loving your people and governing your state, are you able to do nothing?

In the opening and shutting of heaven's gate, are you able to play the feminine part?

Enlightened and seeing far into all directions, can you at the same time know nothing?

Rearing, feeding, rearing without claiming for its own, doing the work without claiming doing it, raising without being master.

This is mysterious Virtue.

Holding body and soul, embracing the one. Can anything escape?

Cultivating Chee (Yen-Chee), and becoming supple,

can be as a newborn.

Cleansing, then seeing with the primal vision,

found no strain.

Loving all men, rulers need no cleverness.

Opening and closing the gate of heaven,

cannot go without female.

Understanding all things,

can you still do nothing?

Creates, maintains.

Bearing yet not possessing,

Working yet not taking credit,

Leading yet not dominating,

The Primal Virtue.

While carrying your active life on your head

can you embrace the quiet spirit in your arms,

and not let go?

While being fully focused on vour vital breath

can you make it soft like that of a newborn babe?

While cleaning your inner mirror

can you leave it without blemish?

While loving the people and ruling the country

can you dispense with cleverness?

While opening and closing the gates of heaven

can you be like a mother bird?

While penetrating the four quarters with your insight

can you remain simple?

Help
the people live!

Nourish the people!

Help
them live yet lay no claim to them.

Benefit them yet seek no gratitude.

Guide thern yet do not control them.

This is called the hidden Virtue.

Living
both an emotional and intellectual life,

can you join them without separation?

Breathing and moving,

can you be as soft as a child?

Seeing,

can you narrow and sharpen your focus

on the universe till it is perfect?

Loving,

can you care for and lead all the people

without becoming known as the care-provider and leader?

Opening and closing the gates of life and death

can you remain powerless?

Knowing and understanding science, reason and politics,

are you able to let it go?

Create and sustain ideas and things,

but do not attempt to control them.

Manage them, but do not ask them for credit or favors.

Guide them, but do not dominate.

This is the way of the universe.

Can you keep the unquiet physical-soul from straying, hold fast to the unity
and middle, and never quit it?

Can you, when concentrating your breath, make it soft like that of an infant?

Strive after less tainted perfection, let it be aided by penetrating insight.
So wipe and cleanse your vision of the mystery till all is without blur.

Can you love the people and rule the land, yet remain unknown?

Can you in opening and shutting the heavenly gates, ever play the feminine part?

Can your mind penetrate every corner of the land, but you yourself never interfere?
Can you renounce the grosser mind for comprehending all inside knowledge?

Produce
things and rear well,

but never lay claims to such things -

control them, never lean upon them.

Rely on some innate ability to act well.

Be a sort of master among others, just refrain from mismanaging.

Here is found the essence of dao might, its deep, mystic virtue.

While you

Cultivate the soul and embrace unity,

can you keep them from separating?

Focus your vital breath until it is supremely soft,

can you be like a baby?

Cleanse the mirror of mysteries,

can you make it free of blemish?

Love the people and enliven the state,

can you do so without cunning?

Open and close the gate of heaven,

can you play the part of the female?

Reach out with clarity in all directions,

can you refrain from action?

It gives birth to them and nurtures them,

It gives birth to them but does not possess them,

It rears them but does not control them.

This is called "mysterious integrity."

By conserving the natural and spiritual powers it is possible to escape dissolution.

By restraining the passions and letting gentleness have its sway it is possible to continue as a child.

By purging the mind of impurities it is possible to remain untainted.

By governing the people with love it is possible to remain unknown.

By continual use of the Gates of Heaven it is possible to preserve them from rust.

By transparency on all sides it is possible to remain unrecognized.

o bring forth and preserve, to produce without possessing, to act without hope of reward, and to expand without waste, this is the supreme virtue.

Worry Creates Walls

Keep your thoughts from wandering

to worries, frets, and fears.

This only makes your body rigid and tight,

unavailable to your beloved.

Seeing the world through your fears

creates walls.

Seeing the world through your love

creates intimacy.

When I am worried and fretful

I protect myself by withdrawing.

I retreat into my fearful thoughts

as if by imagining the worst

I somehow prepare for it.

Everyone is left outside,

including my beloved,

waiting for me to regain my senses.

Can you keep the spirit and embrace the One without departing from them?

Can you concentrate your vital force and achieve the highest degree of weakness like an infant?

Can you clean and purify your profound insight so it will be spotless?

Can you love the people and govern the state without knowledge (cunning)?

Can you play the role of the female in the opening and closing of the gates of Heaven?

Can you understand all and penetrate all without taking any action?

To produce things and to rear them, To produce, but not to take
possession of them, To act, but not to rely on one's own ability, To
lead them, but not to master them - This is called profound and secret
virtue.

Can you hold
the door of your tent

Wide to the firmament?

Can you, with the simple stature

Of a child, breathing nature,

Become, notwithstanding,

A man?

Can you continue befriending

With no prejudice, no ban?

Can you, mating with heaven,

Serve as the female part?

Can your learned head take leaven

From the wisdom of your heart?

If you can bear issue and nourish its growing,

If you can guide without claim or strife,

If you can stay in the lead of men without their knowing,

You are at the core of life.

To devote your soul and body to the DAO, can you never leave it?

To focus your inner energy to the softest, can you be like a newborn?

To remove your inner dust and see the DAO, can your mind be as clean as a mirror?

To love your people and govern your country, can you practice WUWEI?

To control your desires, can you be as humble as a female?

To understand everything, can you stay without knowledge?

Create and nurture but do not own,

Do things but do not claim credit,

Lead but do not control.

These are real DE.

In accordance with the Tao Eternal,

Embrace your body and mind in oneness without any diremption.

Enliven your vital energy until it reaches the suppleness of a baby.

Cleanse your mind to eliminate all unclarity.

Love your people and lead your community without unbalanced action.

Be receptive as a gentle female in the rhythmic intercourse of the Kosmos.

Remain in the state of not-knowing

while achieving knowledge in all fields.

This is the spiritual virtue of the Kosmos:

Birthing life without possessing,

Nurturing life without expecting,

Rearing life without dominating.

How is it

That you hold your soul and body together?

Is it like a quiet infant

That you soften your breath?

Is it without any dust

That you clear your mind as a metaphysical mirror?

Is it without willful actions

That you love and take care of your country and people?

Is it without any dark corner

That you sense what is happening in the world?

Is it without misguiding knowledge

That you understand the whole world?

The metaphysical getter is one

That lets be everything that is born,

Produces without possessing anything surplus,

Achieves successes without being proud of them,

And rules well without any executive power.

Can you coax your mind from its wandering...and still yourself?:

Are you able to avoid separation from creation?

Focusing your energy on oneness with all:

Can you be like a child?

Can you cleanse your inner vision,

until you see nothing but the light?

Can you love people and lead them,

without imposing your will?

Can you deal with the most vital matters

by letting events take their course?

Can you step back from your own notions

and understand all things?

The Tao Gives birth and nourishes,

it produces, but it does not possess.

The Tao acts with no expectations.

Be like the Tao: surpass, but don't take charge.

This is called The Mysterious Virtue.

