===== Chapter 1 =====

A way that can be spoken

Is not a lasting way.

A name that can be named

Is not a lasting name.

Without a name: the beginning of Heaven and Earth.

Having names: the mother of the ten thousand things.

Therefore:

Constantly without desire, thereby observe the mystery.

Constantly with desire, thereby observe the boundaries.

Those which these two are produced by

Are the same but named differently.

The abstraction of calling them the same

The abstraction upon abstraction—

The gateway to a host of mysteries.

Tao called Tao is not Tao. Names can name no lasting name.

Nameless: the origin of heaven and earth. Naming: the mother of ten thousand things.

Empty of desire, perceive mystery. Filled with desire, perceive manifestations.

These have the same source, but different names.

Call them both deep - Deep and again deep: the gateway to all mystery.

The Tao you can tell is not the true Tao.

The names you can name are not the true names.

The nameless is the origin of heaven and earth.

The named is the mother of the myriad things.

Always desireless you see its very essence.

Always desiring you see its outer edge.

The source of these two is the same

Yet they are differently named.

They are called the mystery,

Mystery upon mystery,

The gateway to the essence of all.

THE TAO THAT CAN BE TOLD

The true Tao escapes definition,

Likewise, Tao is unburdened by Name.

Heaven and Earth originated unburdened by Name,

However, Name serves well to create All Things.

Unburdened by desire, the essence of Tao unfolds.

With desire, its manifestations alone appear.

The same source serves both essence and manifestation.

While viewed differently, both are characterized by deep mystery.

Deep mystery - wondrous mystery -

A gateway to the very essence of existence.

The Tao is the unobstructed breath.

The Tao holds the opposing forces of the eternal Tao.

The Name* is the unobstructed breath.

The Name holds the opposing forces of the eternal Name.

Heaven and Earth were without names (consciousness) in the beginning.

The names of the ten-thousand things (everything) arose through its mother.

If you are eternally without deep-seated desires, then you perceive its mystery.

If you have deep-seated desires, then you perceive its outer form.

These both (the essence and outer form) have the same origin but have different names.

Oneness (the Source) is called the mystery.

The mystery will always be mysterious.

All people are at the door of this mysterious One.

* The Name: The universe becoming conscious of itself through its human form.

THE NATURE OF THE TAO

The Tao-Path is not the All-Tao.

The Name is not the Thing named.

Unmanifested,
it is the Secret Father of

##########

##########

##########

Heaven

####
####

#### ####

#### ####

and Earth

manifested,
it is their Mother.

To
understand this Mystery, one must be fulfilling one's will,

and if one is not thus free, one will but gain a smattering of it.

The
Tao is one, and the Teh but a phase thereof. The abyss of this

Mystery is the Portal of Serpent-Wonder.

The
Tao

The
Teh,

source of the Mother

#### ####

The
Tao,

source of the Father

##########

Heaven

##########

##########

##########

Ch'ien

####
####

#### ####

##########

Fire

####
####

##########

##########

Water - Tui

Sun

##########

#### ####

##########

##########

##########

#### ####

Air - Sun

##########

#### ####

#### ####

Earth - Ken

Moon

#### ####

##########

#### ####

K'an

Earth

#### ####

#### ####

#### ####

K'un

The spirit one can talk about is not the eternal spirit, and what youcan name is not the eternal name. Nameless-Tao is the beginning of theheavens and the Earth. If you name it-it is no more than Matter.

Therefore: he who conceives of nature freely grasps this Spirit andhe who strives for material things is left with only the shell. Spiritand matter are both one in their origin, yet different in appearance. Thisunity is a mystery-truly the mystery of all mysteries, the gate to allspirituality.

The Ineffable, about which is spoken, is not the eternal Ineffable

A name for the Unnameable, is but a name

The Unnameable is what makes everything what it is

By naming things you divide the Indivisible

Only one who gives up all his desires can experience the Indivisible

One who still cherishes desires, will experience only dissension

Both will see the same reality, but experience it differently

One who goes from the false reality into the other,

Will pass through the narrow gate and receive the secret of true life

Nature can never be completely described, for such a description of Nature would have to duplicate Nature. No name can fully express what it represents.

It is Nature itself, and not any part (or name or description) abstracted from Nature, which is the ultimate source of all that happens, all that comes and goes, begins and ends, is and is not. But to describe Nature as "the ultimate source of all" is still only a description, and such a description is not Nature itself. Yet since, in order to speak of it, we must use words, we shall have to describe it as "the ultimate source of all."

If Nature is inexpressible, he who desires to know Nature as it is in itself will not try to express it in words

Although the existence of Nature and a description of that existence are two different things, yet they are also the same.

For both are ways of existing. That is, a description of existence must have its own existence, which is different from the existence of that which it describes; and so again we have to recognize an existence which cannot be described.

The Way that can be told of is not an Unvarying Way;

The names that can be named are not unvarying names.

It was from the Nameless that Heaven and Earth sprang;

The named is but the mother that rears the ten thousand creatures, each after its kind.

Truly, "Only he that rids himself forever of desire can see the Secret Essences";

He that has never rid himself of desire can see only the Outcomes.

These two things issued from the same mould, but nevertheless are different in name.

This "same mould" we can but call the Mystery,

Or rather the "Darker than any Mystery",

The Doorway whence issued all Secret Essences.

That which can be perceived is not the timeless That.

That which can be named is not the nameless One.

The source of heaven and earth is without form or substance.

Naming creates the ten thousand things.

When desire is absent, the mystery is obvious.

When desire occurs, creation unfolds.

Mystery and creation arise from the same source.

The source is emptiness.

Void within void.

The realm of Tao.

A path fit to travel

Is not a general path

A name fit for calling

Is not a generic name

"Nothing" names the origin of heaven and earth

"Being" names the mother of the myriad beings

And so, always be dispassionate

In order to see the mysteries

Always be passionate

In order to see the objectives

These two mean the same (when) emerging

While diverging in significance

The sameness tells of their mystery

Mystery leading to greater mystery

(Is) the gateway to every mystery

Tao

As for the road,

The Road that can be told is not the eternal Road.

As for names,

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The nameless is the beginning of the ten thousand things.

The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.

Therefore, ever desireless, one can see the mystery.

Those constantly with desires,

will only see what they yearn for and seek.

These two spring from the same source.

They have different names; yet they are called the same.

That which is even more profound than the profound

The gateway to all mystery.

Tao is beyond words and beyond understanding. Words may be used to speak of it, but they cannot contain it.

Tao existed before words and names, before heaven and earth, before the ten thousand things. It is the unlimited father and mother of all limited things.

Therefore, to see beyond all boundaries to the subtle heart of things, dispense with names, with concepts, with expectations and ambitions and differences.

Tao and its many manifestations arise from the same source:

subtle wonder within mysterious darkness. This is the beginning of all understanding.

The Cosmic Consciousness described

Is not quite the timeless Origin.

The Name that one puts into words

Fails to hold the Essence.

Beyond the empty division of heaven and earth,

The Nameless is-

The living ground of being.

The Nameless bears the Essence;

The names reveal the functions

Of all the numberless compressions of Being,

Born of the vast and silent Mother.

Release your attachment to appearances,

And the Tao will be there.

The manifest and the immanent

Are of the same Cosmic Origin-

The living, teeming darkness.

Eternal, shimmering darkness,

Reflecting itself in transformation,

Beyond all form and name-

Through the gateway of your heart.

This poem speaks of the relationships between names—the words we give to things, events, actions, and of course ourselves—and the nameless essence from which we derive our life, and to which we return in death. Lao Tzu does not want us to think that our words are hopelessly inadequate to understanding the Cosmic Consciousness (this is an interpretation frequently placed on this poem in particular); rather, he'd like us to realize the natural limitations of our words. Words and language have limitations, just as our bodies, our planet and its natural resources, and our mental faculties have limitations. Words and names "fail to hold the essence" because, as Lao Tzu says in the final stanza, the essence can only be held in our hearts. But words, properly used, are capable of revealing the possibility of deep understanding, through describing the functions—what each thing does, and how it relates to the Whole. Lao Tzu is simply asking us to remember that function and action represent the manifestation, and not the immanence, of the Tao. If we can keep this in mind, that the manifestation varies and transforms; that what a thing does is not everything it is (for example, you are not your occupation, your family role, your gender, your race, your religion, etc.—not even the combination of these things); then we are not likely to make the mistake of reifying, or fixing, our ideas and descriptions of the operations of the Cosmos. When we are successful in avoiding this error, we have taken a vast step in furthering the natural order of the Cosmos and of human society. For in this clarity, this awareness of the limitations of language, we remove our feet from the concrete of religious, political, and ideological position-taking that is at the root of so much of the prejudice, conflict, injustice, and slaughter common to mankind over the past 3,000 or so years.

In this poetical meditation on language and its relation to the Cosmic Reality, Lao Tzu is suggesting another movement of understanding, which has to do with facing the apparent contradictions and logical impossibilities that he is presenting. Lao Tzu invites us into the cycle of logical tail-chasing (words can't properly describe Tao, but let's talk about it anyway), because he wants us to feel beyond the boundaries of reason. He would like us to step into that "living, teeming darkness," for this is the space in which we can truly feel the Tao, through our every bodily cell. The words that we use can point us toward this "shimmering darkness" of understanding, especially when we ask the teaching aspect of the Cosmic Consciousness, which Lao Tzu calls the Sage, to help us. But the words are not themselves the immanence; thus there is no such thing as "holy writ."

The Tao described in words is not the real Tao.

Words cannot describe it.

Nameless, it is the source of creation.

Named, it is the mother of all things.

To
see Tao the observer must be motiveless.

Those with selfish motives see only

the surface, not the innermost depths.

These
two kinds of observers look alike,

but differ in the insight of their observations.

They look alike because they are both human.

Within humanity is the key to the door of creation.

The Tao which can be expressed is not the unchanging Tao; the name which can be named is not the unchanging name.

The nameless is the beginning of the Heaven Earth; the mother of all things is the nameable.

Thus, while the eternal non-being leads toward the fathomless, the eternal being conduct to the boundary.

Although these two have been differently named they come from the same.

As the same they may be described as the abysmal. The abyss of the abysmal is the gate of all mystery.

The Tao that can be expressed is not the eternal Tao; The name that can be defined is not the unchanging name.

Non-existence is called the antecedent of heaven and earth; Existence is the mother of all things.

From eternal non-existence, therefore, we serenely observe the mysterious beginning of the Universe; From eternal existence we clearly see the apparent distinctions.

These two are the same in source and become different when manifested.

This sameness is called profundity. Infinite profundity is the gate whence comes the beginning of all parts of the Universe.

To Guide with Names

To guide what can be guided is not constant guiding.

To name what can be named is not constant naming.

'Not-exist' names the beginning (boundary) of the cosmos (Heaven and earth)

'Exists' names the mother of the ten-thousand natural kinds .

Thus, to treat 'not-exist' as constant is desiring to use it to view its mysteries.

To treat 'exists' as constant is desiring to use it to view its manifestations.

These two emerge together yet have different names.

'Together'--call that 'obscure. ' 'Obscure' it and it is more obscure.

. . . the gateway of a crowd of mysteries.

The Tao that can be spoken of is not the Tao itself.

The name that can be given is not the name itself.

The unnameable is the source of the universe.

The nameable is the originator of all things.

Therefore, oftentimes without intention I see the wonder of Tao.

Oftentimes with intention I see its manifestations.

Its wonder and its manifestations are one and the same.

Since their emergence, they have been called by different names.

Their identity is called the mystery.

From mystery to further mystery:

The entry of all wonders!

The Tao that can be named is not the eternal Tao.

The Name that can be spoken is not the eternal name.

The Nameless is the beginning of Heaven and Earth.

The Named is the mother of all creatures.

Observe the mysteries of the Tao without longing.

Survey its appearance with desire.

Both mysteries and appearance come from the same origin but wear a different name;

they are enigmatic.

The greatest mystery is the gate to all mysteries.

A tao that can be spoken about

Is not the constant Tao;

A name that can be named

Is not the constant name.

Nonbeing names

The ten thousand things' beginning;

Being names

The ten thousand things' mother.

Therefore, constantly be desireless,

Whereby to observe its minutiae;

Constantly be desirous,

Whereby to observe where it ends.

The two issued from the same origin,

And, though different in name,

Refer to the same thing.

Deep and remote, doubly deep and remote,

Gate of multitudinous minutiae.

The Tao that can be expressed in words is not the eternal Tao.

The name that can be defined in words is not the name that never changes.

Non-existence is what we will call the source of heaven and earth.

Existence is the mother of all things.

From eternal non-existence, therefore, we observe the beginning of the existence of the many hidden qualities of the universe.

From eternal existence, therefore, we clearly observe the overt qualities of the universe.

These two, the hidden and the overt, are originally the same at source, and become different when they manifest themselves.

This same origin is "the smallest of the small."

The absolute "smallest of the small" is the gate from which the beginning of all the parts of the universe emerges.

The way that can be spoken of

Is not the constant way;

The name that can be named

Is not the constant name.

The
nameless was the beginning of heaven and earth;

The named was the mother of the myriad creatures.

Hence
always rid yourself of desires in order to observe its secrets;

But always allow yourself to have desires in order to observe its manifestations.

These
two are the same

But diverge in name as they issue forth.

Being the same they are called mysteries,

Mystery upon mystery -

The gateway of the manifold secrets.

Reason's Realization

The Reason that can be reasoned is not the eternal Reason. The name that can be named is not the eternal Name. The Unnamable is of heaven and earth the beginning. The Namable becomes of the ten thousand things the mother.

Therefore it is said:

"He who desireless is found

The spiritual of the world will sound.

But he who by desire is bound

Sees the mere shell of things around."

These two things are the same in source but different in name. Their sameness is called a mystery. Indeed, it is the mystery of mysteries. Of all spirituality it is the door.

Words cannot describe the Tao, and The Tao cannot be named. That which is eternal is unnameable. Naming is the basis of things. Free from desire you are a mystery. Caught in desire you are known. The mystery and the known are not separate. It is naming which separates us. Only through paradox can you understand.

Direction, as expressed, is no ordinary direction;

as named, no ordinary name.

Null identifies the universe at the beginning.

Ull identifies the mother of myriad matters.

Thus, visit Null to observe its intricateness.

Visit Ull to observe its limitlessness.

These two spring from the same source;

only their identifications differ.

Both are profound.

Profound upon profound, it is the portal to all intricacies.

A Way become Way isn't the perennial Way.

A name become name isn't the perennial name:

the named is mother to the ten thousand things,

but the unnamed is origin to all heaven and earth.

In perennial nonbeing you see mystery, and in perennial being you see appearance.

Though the two are one and the same, once they arise, they differ in name.

One and the same they're called dark-enigma,

dark-enigma deep within dark-enigma,

gateway of all mystery.

Tao that can be described is not the universal and eternal Tao;

Name that can be named is not the universal and eternal name.

The beginning of Heaven and Earth is nameless;

The mother of everything is naming.

Thus:

Be always objective, one discover the wonders;

Be always subjective, one only sees the manifestations.

Both emerge from the same source, but with different names.

Both are mysterious.

The mystery hidden inside of mysteries

Is the door to all wonders.

A
tao that one can tao

Is not the entire tao

A name that one can name

Is not the entire name.

In
the absence of names

Lies the origin of heavens and earth

The presence of names

Is mother to the 10000 things.

So
viewing entireness without desire

One may see subtleties

Viewing entireness with desire

One may see boundaries.

That
which is these both

Goes about as itself yet there are different names.

Categorizing them together there is insight

Very deep insight

The gateway to collective subtleties.

The principle that can be enunciated is not the one that always was. The being that can be named is not the one that was at all times.

Before time there was an ineffable, unnameable being. When it was still unnameable, it conceived heaven and earth. When it had thus become nameable, it gave birth to the multitude of beings.

These two acts are but one, under two different denominations.

The unique act of generation; that is the mystery of the beginning; the effects.

The Tao that can be spoken is not the eternal Tao

The name that can be named is not the eternal name

The nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth

The named is the mother of myriad things

Thus, constantly free of desire

One observes its wonders

Constantly filled with desire

One observes its manifestations

These two emerge together but differ in name

The unity is said to be the mystery

Mystery of mysteries, the door to all wonders

The Tao that can be completely explained or expressed in words is not the constant, eternally unchanging and true Tao.

If the name of this Tao can be defined with words, then it is not the constant, eternally unchanging name of the true Tao.

Names did not exist prior to Creation. The nameless Tao is therefore the source of the universe.

Once it manifests itself as the physical universe, it can be named. Everything is derived from it through natural processes. It is therefore the mother of all things.

If we approach the Tao without self-serving desires, we can readily observe its inner wonders and marvels. This establishes a direct connection with the source, the vast intelligence of universal consciousness. This gives us flashes of powerful, intuitive insights, as well as free-flowing creativity.

If we approach the Tao full of self-serving desires, then we can only observe its external physical manifestations, rather than its inner essence. These desires block the connection and interfere with the Tao process. We often do this to ourselves.

The Tao's external manifestations (life, nature, the cosmos, and so on) and its inner wonders (oneness, the living void, the flow, etc.) are both properties of the ultimate reality. Although we call them by different names, they are but two sides of the same coin.

This unity of these two aspects gives us an interesting paradox. They seem distinctively different, and yet they lead to one another. Understanding of the Tao's inner essence gives us greater understanding of its outer manifestations, and vice versa.

Our recognition and acknowledgement of this paradox will open the door for us to further explore the infinite wonders of the Tao.

Notes

The Tao that can be spoken (expressed in words)

Is not the constant (eternal) Tao

The Name that can be named

Is not the eternal Name

The "Nameless Name" - that which existed before there was anything to name - is a synonym for the Tao.

The main idea here is that the Tao is a concept beyond reason and logic. It is the universal principle that permeates every action and every phenomenon, but it cannot be adequately understood through the rational mind. To comprehend it completely, you must exercise your intuition and get in touch with the fundamental divinity that connects everyone.

Lao Tzu is also pointing out the limitation of spoken words and written texts. Our tendencies to categorize, define and analyze only give us the limited understanding of how the Tao acts upon the material world. This is exactly what happens when we study physics, biology, chemistry, and other natural sciences.

On the other hand, if we free ourselves of this limiting human desire to put everything into words, and become aware of our wordless communion with nature, we can catch glimpses of a divine wisdom. Beyond categories, definitions, and analyses, it is wisdom far more profound than anything that academic knowledge, science and technology can offer.

Translation Notes

One translation renders the first line as "The way that can be trodden," which fails to take the above into account. Another translation mistakes "can" as "possible" and waxes poetic about "The possible Tao." That's even further away from the original meaning.

In this context, this character means "ever-lasting." In one instance a translator renders it as "absolute," which is close, but not quite correct.

The Tao that can be understood cannot be the primal, or cosmic, Tao, just as an idea that can be expressed in words cannot be the infinite idea.

And yet this ineffable Tao was the source of all spirit and matter, and being expressed was the mother of all created things.

Therefore not to desire the things of sense is to know the freedom of spirituality; and to desire is to learn the limitation of matter. These two things spirit and matter, so different in nature, have the same origin. This unity of origin is the mystery of mysteries, but it is the gateway to spirituality.

Tao that can be spoken of,

Is not the Everlasting (ch'ang) Tao.

Name that can be named,

Is not the Everlasting (ch'ang) name.

Nameless (wu-ming), the origin (shih) of heaven and earth;

Named (yu-ming), the mother (mu) of ten thousand things.

Alternate,

Non-being (wu), to name (ming) the origin (shih) of heaven and earth;

Being (yu), to name (ming) the mother of ten thousand things.

Therefore, always (ch'ang) without desire (wu-yü),

In order to observe (kuan) the hidden mystery (miao);

Always (ch'ang) with desire (yu-yü),

In order to observe the manifestations (chiao).

Alternate,

Therefore, by the Everlasting (ch'ang) Non-Being (wu),

We desire (yü) to observe (kuan) its hidden mystery (miao);

By the Everlasting (ch'ang) Being (yu),

We desire (yü) to observe the manifestations (chiao).

These two issue from the same origin,

Though named differently.

Both are called the dark (hsüan).

Dark and even darker,

The door to all hidden mysteries (miao).

The Tao described in words is not the real Tao. Words cannot describe it. Nameless it is the source of creation; named it is the mother of all things.

To see Tao the observer must be motiveless. Those with selfish motives see only the surface, not the innermost depths. These two kinds of observers look alike but differ in the insight of their observations.

They look alike because they are both human; within humanity is the key to the door of creation.

The Tao that can be defined is not the real Tao.

The name that can be named is not the real Name.

The unnamable [Tao] is the source of Heaven and Earth.

Naming is the mother of all particular things.

Free from desire, you experience reality.

Trapped in desire, you see only appearances.

Reality and appearance have different names,

but they emerge from the same source [i.e., the Tao].

This source is called darkness, deep darkness;

and yet it is the way to all wisdom.

One

The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The nameless is the beginning of heaven and Earth.

The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.

Ever desireless, one can see the mystery.

Ever desiring, one sees the manifestations.

These two spring from the same source but differ in name;

this appears as darkness.

Darkness within darkness.

The gate to all mystery.

The Tao that is utterable

Is not the eternal Tao;

The name that is namable

Is not the eternal Name.

The Nothingness is the name of the beginning of heaven and earth;

The Being (substance) is the name of the mother of all things.

Hence one should gain an insight into the beginning of the Tao by constantly observing the Nothingness,

And should perceive the end of the Tao by constantly observing the Being.

These two things, the Nothingness and the Being, are of the same origin but different in name.

They are both so profound as to be a key to the door of myriad secrets.

No Tao that may be Tao is the constant Tao;

No name that may be a name is the constant name.

By non-being you name the beginning of Heaven and Earth;

By being you name the mother of the ten thousand things.

Therefore, always free of desire you see the secret;

Always with desire you see its appearance.

These two

Are the same in origin yet different in name.

Their sameness may be called a mystery.

It is the mystery beyond mysteries,

The gate to myriad secrets.

Dao that can be expressed in words is not the absolute Dao.

The names that can be given are not the absolute names.

Non-being is before the dawn of time,

Being is when everything begins to emerge.

Therefore, maintaining a passive and receptive mode,

You can watch the secret of life;

Maintaining an active and attentive mode,

You can perceive the rhythm of life.

These two cognitive processes, though differing in names,

Are in the same continuum.

Both are known as the inscrutable Mystery,

Which is the greatest of all mysteries.

And it is through these perspectives that we can observe the marvellous phenomena of Nature.

Realization of Tao

T'i Tao

The Tao that can be stated is not the Eternal Tao.

The name that can be named is not the Eternal Name.

The Unnameable is originator of Heaven and Earth.

The Nameable is mother of the ten thousand things.

Therefore,

Always be desireless, so as to discern Tao's wonderful essence;

Always have some desire, so as to discern its manifestations.

These two come out from the same source,

But are different in name.

Their identical nature is a mystery.

Mystery of mysteries -

That is the gate of all wonderful essence.

The Tao that can be expressed is not the Unchanging Tao;

The name that can be named is not the Unchanging name.

The Unnameable is that from which Heaven and Earth derived, leaving itself unchanged.

Thinking of it as having a name, let it be called the Mother of all things.

He who is without earthly passions and without desire can perceive the profound mystery of that Unmanifested

Existence.

He who has not rid himself of desire can perceive only the Manifest, with its differentiations.

Nevertheless, the Manifest and the Unmanifest are in origin the same.

This sameness is the Mystery of Mysteries, the deep within the deep, the Doorway into all Mystery.

If Tao can be Taoed, it's not Tao.

If its name can be named , it's not its name.

Has no name: precedes heaven and earth.

Has a name: mother of ten thousand things.

For it is

Always dispassionate: see its inwardness;

Always passionate: see its outwardness.

The names are different but the source is the same.

Call the sameness mystery:

Mystery of mystery, the door to inwardness.

Tao, the subtle reality of the universe cannot be described.

That which can be described in words is merely a conception of the mind.

Although names and descriptions have been applied to it, the subtle reality is beyond the description.

One may use the word "Nothingness" to describe the Origin of the universe, and "Beingness" to describe the Mother of the myriad things,

but Nothingness and Beingness are merely conceptions.

From the perspective of Nothingness,

one may perceive the expansion of the universe.

From the perspective of Beingness,

one may distinguish individual things.

Both are for the conceptual convenience of the mind.

Although different concepts can be applied,

Nothingness and Beingness and other conceptual activity of the mind all come from the same indescribable subtle Originalness.

The Way is the unfoldment of such subtle reality.

Having reached the subtlety of the universe,

one may see the ultimate subtlety,

the Gate of All Wonders.

I.

Embodying
the Tao

The
way that can be overtrod is not the Eternal Way,

The name
that can be named is not the Everlasting Name

Which
Nameless brought forth Heaven and Earth, which Named, it name we may,

The
Mother of all the myriad things of time and space became.

Thereby
we sound eternally the mystery divine,

But only
without desire to sound, for if desire abide

The
portals of the issuing host our baffled sight confine,

And
deep within the eternal veil the mystery shall hide.

These
two, the Nameless and the Named, they differ but in name,

For
in their vast progression from the deep they are the same,

The
deep of deeps, from whose eternal gate all spirit came.

Tao that can be expressed is not Everlasting Tao.

The name that can be named is not the Everlasting Name.

The Name, in its inner aspect, is Life-Spring of Heaven and Earth.

The Name, in its outer aspect, is Mother of all created things.

Therefore:

To perceive the mystery of Life, desire always to reach the innermost.

To perceive the limitations of things, desire always to posses them.

These two aspects of Life are One.

In their out-come they become different in Name but in their depth they are One.

In a depth, still deeper yet, is the Door of many mysteries.

TAO
(THE LAWS OF THE UNIVERSE) can be talked about,

but
not the Eternal Tao (Laws of the Universe).

Names
can be named,

but
not the Eternal Name.

(You
cannot name the unknown.)

As
the origin of heaven-and-earth,

it
is not describable:

As
"the Mother" of all things,

it
is describable.

(You
cannot describe the unknown origin.)

As
it is always hidden,

We
should look at its Inner Sum and Substance (through philosophy

and
poetry):

As
always visible,

We
should look at its Outer Form (through science and obsevation).

These
two flow from the same source

(the
Laws of the Universe,)

though
differently named;

And
both are called mysteries.

The
Mystery of mysteries is the Gate of all sum and substance.

(Beyond
the gate of experience is the Way.

It
is in all ways greater and more subtle than the world.)

The Way that may truly be regarded as the Way is other than a permanent way.

The terms that may truly be regarded as terms are other than permanent terms.

The term Non-being indicates the beginning of heaven and earth; the term Being indicates the mother of the ten thousand things.

For, indeed, it is through the constant alteration between Non-being and Being that the wonder of the one and the limitation of the other will be seen.

These two, having a common origin, are named with different terms.

What they have in common is called the Mystery, The Mystery of Mysteries, the Gate of all Wonders.

The Tao that can be trodden is not the enduring and

unchanging Tao. The name that can be named is not the enduring and

unchanging name.

(Conceived
of as) having no name, it is the Originator of heaven

and earth; (conceived of as) having a name, it is the Mother of all

things.

Always
without desire we must be found,

If its deep mystery we would sound;

But if desire always within us be,

Its outer fringe is all that we shall see.

Under
these two aspects, it is really the same; but as development

takes place, it receives the different names. Together we call them

the Mystery. Where the Mystery is the deepest is the gate of all that

is subtle and wonderful.

The Finite cannot be all of the Infinite!
THOU by any specific name
is not all there is to THOU.
The un-nameable is the Father of the myriads
of things.
The nameable is the Mother of it's own myriads of things.

Therefore;
never wanting, one may observe the wondrously subtle;
Desiring, one may witness
the manifestations.
Both
of these are attributes of the same Source.
They have different 'nameabilities'
but the same designation:
Mystery
of Mysteries,
the Gate of all wonders!

Words
and names are not the way

They can't define the absolute

It's better that you look within

Hold your tongue and just be mute

Look
within and look out too

You will not find a separation

Out there you see appearance

Within you see origination

Look
within with wonder

At emptiness and bliss

For wonder names totality

Where nothing is amiss

The
space within is always there

If you can moderate desire

A place of utter emptiness

And possibility entire

TAO can be talked about, but not the Eternal Tao.

Names can be named, but not the Eternal Name.

As the origin of heaven-and-earth, it is nameless:

As "the Mother" of all things, it is nameable.

So, as ever hidden, we should look at its inner essence:

As always manifest, we should look at its outer aspects.

These two flow from the same source, though differently named;

And both are called mysteries.

The Mystery of mysteries is the Door of all essence.

The Tao that is spoken of, cannot be truly explained.

The grandest eloquence cannot define it.

It has no name, and is the creator of Heaven and Earth.

Forced to name it, we can call it the Tao (the Way), and accept that it is great.

When we are lost in desire we can see only the outer manifestations of this greatness.

If we free ourselves from desire we can experience the unfathomable depths,

and know the mystery of the great Tao.

The Mystery and the Manifestations are separate, yet they arise from the same source.

This source is deep; so deep its depths cannot be plumbed.

Within its depths is darkness. The Great Mystery within the darkness,

it is the gateway to all understanding.

The tao that can be described

is not the eternal Tao.

The name that can be spoken

is not the eternal Name.

The
nameless is the boundary of Heaven and Earth.

The named is the mother of creation.

Freed
from desire, you can see the hidden mystery.

By having desire, you can only see what is visibly real.

Yet
mystery and reality

emerge from the same source.

This source is called darkness.

Darkness
born from darkness.

The beginning of all understanding.

Tao means how: how things happen, how things work. Tao is the single principle underlying all creation. Tao is God.

Tao cannot be defined, because it applies to everything. You cannot define something in terms of itself.

If you can define a principle, it is not Tao.

Tao is a principle. Creation, on the other hand, is a process. That is all there is: principle and process, how and what.

All creation unfolds according to Tao. There is no other way.

Tao cannot be defined, but Tao can be known. The method is meditation, or being aware of what is happening. Being aware of what is happening, I begin to see how it is happening. I begin to sense Tao.

To become aware of what is happening, I must pay attention with an open mind. I must set aside my personal prejudices of bias. Prejudiced people see only what fits those prejudices.

The method of meditation works, because principle and process are inseparable. All process reveals the underlying principle. This means that I can know Tao. I can know God.

By knowing Tao, I know how things happen.

The Tao that can be described in words is not the true Tao

The Name that can be named is not the true Name.

From non-existence were called Heaven and Earth

From existence All things were born.

In being without desires, you experience the wonder

But by having desires, you experience the journey.

Yet both spring from the same source and differ mostly in name.

This source is called "Mystery"

Mystery upon Mystery,

The womb giving birth to All of being.

The
infinity that can be conceived is not the

everlasting Infinity.

The infinity that can be described is not the

perpetual Infinity.

The
inconceivable indescribable is the essence

of the all encompassing Infinite.

Conceiving and describing applies only to the

manifestations of Infinity.

Free
from distinctions, experience the oneness of

Infinity.

Focus on distinctions and see only the

manifestations

of Infinity.

Yet
distinction and non-distinction are one within

Infinity.

Potential
within potential is

the essence of Infinity.

The perceived Way is not the eternal Way.

The common name is not the eternal Name.

The Beginning of Heaven and Earth has no name.

The Mother of all things has a name.

Free of desire, behold its mystery.

Bound by desire, observe only its form.

These two are the same, but their forms bear different names.

Together, they are a mystery, subtle and profound,

the gateway to understanding.

The Tao that can be put in words is not the ever-abiding Tao;

The name that can be named is not the ever-abiding name.

The Nameless gives rise to Heaven and Earth.

The Named is the Mother of the Ten Thousand Things.1

Therefore:

It is always so that without desires you can behold its mystery;

Always so that having desires you can behold its manifestations.

These two2 are one and the same, and differ only in name.

This being so is profound, mysterious, and dark:

The threshold to all secrets.

1. i.e. all things in existence.

2. i.e. the Nameless and the Named.

There are ways to follow,

But what is followed is not the true Way.

There are names to give,

But what is given is not the true Name.

Let us call non-being the beginning of the universe

And let us call being the development of all things.

When we follow non-being

We approach the wonder of the Way.

When we follow being

We approach the farther-end manifestation of the Way.

Each has the same origin,

And here exists a metaphysical door to true wisdom.

The Tao that can be told is not the invariant Tao, the names that can be named are not the invariant Names.

Nameless, it is the source of the thousands of things (named, it is 'Mother' of the thousands of things).

Yes: Always: being desireless, one sees the hidden essentials. Always: having desires, one sees only what is sought.

These two lines are about The Merging - it is when things develop and emerge from this that the different names appear.

The Merging is something mysterious - mysterious, and more mysterious, the abode of all the hidden essences.

One cannot know Tao* only by speaking about It.

One cannot name by human name that Origin of the sky and earth Which is the Mother of everything.

Only he who is free from worldly passions can see It; and he who has such passions can see only Its Creation.

Tao and Its Creation are One in essence though called by different names. The passage which exists between them is the door to all the miraculous.

* Synonyms of this word of Chinese origin are the words Primordial Consciousness, Creator, God-the-Father, Allah, Svarog, etc.

The Way (Tao) that can be named, is not the Ultimate Way.

The name given is not the eternal name.

Without name is the source of Heaven and Earth.

With a name is what creates all things.

Without
desires the essence of things can be seen.

Who has desires sees only the manifestation of things.

Both
aspects have the same source,

They become different, subject to perception.

But are equal in the depth of depth,

From where everything comes into existence.

A
way (dao) that one can be directed along is not the constant Dao. A name that
can be given is not a constant name. Nameless is the beginning of Heaven and
Earth. Named is the mother of the myriad creatures.

So,
It is always by desirelessness that one sees the hidden (noumenal) aspect, and
always by being in a state of having desires that one observes the outer (phenomenal)
aspect. These two [aspects of all reality] emerge together and are differently
named. Together, they are called the dark and mysterious. The most dark and
mysterious of the dark and mysterious Is the portal of the multitudinous wonders.

The Tao that can be spoken of is not the eternal Tao;

The Name that can be named is not the eternal Name.

The Nameless [non-being] is the origin of heaven and earth;

The Namable [being] is the mother of all things.

Therefore constantly without desire,

There is the recognition of subtlety;

But constantly with desire,

Only the realization of potentiality.

The two come from the same source,

Having different names.

Both are called mysteries,

More mystical than the most mystical,

The gate of all subtleties.

The Beginning of Power

The Tao that can be expressed

Is not the Tao of the Absolute.

The name that can be named

Is not the name of the Absolute.

The nameless originated Heaven and Earth.

The named is the Mother of All Things.

Thus, without expectation

One will always perceive the subtlety;

And, with expectation

One will always perceive the boundary.

The source of these two is identical,

Yet their names are different.

Together they are called profound,

Profound and mysterious,

The gateway to the Collective Subtlety.

Green tea is wonderful. There are many words that can describe its aroma, its flavor. I can tell you of the temperature of the tea as I sip it from its cup. The smells that fill my nose just as my tongue tastes the first drips. I can explain to you the benefits of the tea. But, you still have not experienced the tea. You only have a rude concept of what it might be. Unless you sip from the cup yourself, you are not experiencing the real. And this is true with the Dao.

There are ways but the Way is uncharted;

There are names but not nature in words:

Nameless indeed is the source of creation

But things have a mother and she has a name.

The
secret waits for the insight

Of eyes unclouded by longing;

Those who are bound by desire

See only the outward container.

These
two come paired but distinct

By their names.

Of all things profound,

Say that their pairing is deepest,

The gate to the root of the world.

The Tao that can be spoken of is not the eternal Tao;

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth;

The named is the root of all things.

Therefore, the subtleties of Tao are always apprehended through their formlessness,

The limits of things are always seen through their form.

These two (the form and the formless) have the same source but different names.

Both of them can be called deep and profound,

The deepest and the most profound, the door of all mysteries.

The Dao that can be described in language is not the constant Dao;

the name that can be given it is not its constant name.

Nameless, it is the origin of the myriad things;

named, it is the mother of the myriad things.

Therefore, always be without desire so as to see their subtlety.

And always have desire so as to see their ends.

These two emerge together but have different names.

Together, we refer to them as mystery: the mystery upon mystery and gateway of all subtleties.

1. As for the Way, the Way that can be spoken of is not the constant Way;

2. As for names, the name that can be named is not the constant name.

3. The nameless is the beginning of the ten thousand things;

4. The named is the mother of the ten thousand things.

5.
Therefore, those constantly without desires, by this means will perceive its
subtlety.

6. Those constantly with desires, by this means will see only that which they
yearn for and seek.

7.
These two together emerge;

8. They have different names yet they're called the same;

9. That which is even more profound that the profound—

10. The gateway of all subtleties.

If you can talk
about it,

it ain't Tao.

If it has a name,

it's just another thing.

Tao doesn't
have a name.

Names are for ordinary things.

Stop wanting
stuff. It keeps you from seeing what's real.

When you want stuff, all you see are things.

These two statements
have the same meaning.

Figure them out, and you've got it made.

. The Mystical Way

The Way that can be described is not the absolute Way;

the name that can be given is not the absolute name.

Nameless it is the source of heaven and earth;

named it is the mother of all things.

Whoever is desireless, sees the essence of life.

Whoever desires, sees its manifestations.

These two are the same,

but what is produced has names.

They both may be called the cosmic mystery:

from the cosmic to the mystical

is the door to the essence of all life.

The Tao that can be named is not the absolute Tao.

The name that can be uttered is not the name of the Eternal.

As the unmanifest it is the origin of heaven and earth; manifest it is the mother of all beings.

Whoever free from attachment looks inward with detachment attains the vision of the Unmanifest; whoever is ego-bound and clings to greed sees but the outer show.

The Manifest and the Unmanifest although different in name are one in essence.

This unity is the mystery of the Tao the unfathomable of the primordial ground the starting point of all manifestation.

Understanding The Tao

Lao Tze says,

The Tao is that on which one can always tread.

That on which one cannot always tread is not the Tao.

And fame is that of which one can always remember.

That of which one cannot always remember is not fame.

All things are without names prior to the formation of Heaven and Earth.

And names are brought out to classify various things.

Since there is no name in the very beginning, why should one care about fame!

Hence, those who are constantly free of desire of fame shall see the Tao's subtle secret.

Those who bear desire shall see the end lying in front of them.

Both two types of men ferment their thinking in the same place, yet they will experience different fates.

Both their fates shall be up to Heaven.

Beyond our heaven, there are other heavens: whoever knows this shall find the gate of the Tao.

THE EMBODIMENT OF TAO

Even the finest teaching is not the Tao itself.

Even the finest name is insufficient to define it.

Without words, the Tao can be experienced,

and without a name, it can be known.

To
conduct one's life according to the Tao,

is to conduct one's life without regrets;

to realize that potential within oneself

which is of benefit to all.

Though
words or names are not required

to live one's life this way,

to describe it, words and names are used,

that we might better clarify

the way of which we speak,

without confusing it with other ways

in which an individual might choose to live.

Through
knowledge, intellectual thought and words,

the manifestations of the Tao are known,

but without such intellectual intent

we might experience the Tao itself.

Both
knowledge and experience are real,

but reality has many forms,

which seem to cause complexity.

By
using the means appropriate,

we extend ourselves beyond

the barriers of such complexity,

and so experience the Tao.

The tao that can be told

is not the eternal Tao

The name that can be named

is not the eternal Name.

The unnamable is the eternally real.

Naming is the origin

of all particular things.

Free from desire, you realize the mystery.

Caught in desire, you see only the manifestations.

Yet mystery and manifestations

arise from the same source.

This source is called darkness.

Darkness within darkness.

The gateway to all understanding.

Dao that can be talked about is not the eternal Dao itself;

A name that can be given is not the eternal thing itself.

The nameless existed

Before the birth of birth of Heaven and Earth - Universe;

The names which were given were after

The birth of All Things.

By the eternity of unknown existence

Comprehend the common essence of things;

By the eternity of Existence

Observe the apparent differences.

These two came from the same origin - the unknown,

But with different names.

They all are called the "profoundness",

Profoundly and profoundly it is the entrance

From which come all wonders.

The Tao that is voiced is no longer that of eternal Tao.

The name that has been written is no longer that of eternal name.

The nameless is the beginning of the cosmic universe.

The named is the mother of the myriad creatures.

Being at peace, one can see into the subtle.

Engaging with passion, one can see into the manifest.

They both arise from a common source but have different names.

Both are called the mystery within the mystery.

They are the door to all wonders.

I

A
path is just a path, a name is just a name

What is, is, without sense or differentiation

And only divides itself into things when we give names

Forget
the names of things and you sense fit and flow

Use their names and you see uniqueness, significance

Each perspective is as true as the other

How
can something be both fragmentary and complete?

There's a mystery here calling for a deeper perception

A perception from which all spirituality springs

A Way Can Be a Guide

A way can be a guide, but not a fixed path;

names can be given, but not permanent labels.

Nonbeing is called the beginning of heaven and earth;

being is called the mother of all things.

Always passionless, thereby observe the subtle;

ever intent, thereby observe the apparent.

These two come from the same source but differ in name;

both are considered mysteries.

The mystery of mysteries

is the gateway of marvels.

If Tao can be described, then it is not general Tao.

If a name can be denned, then it is not a general name.

The invisible is the origin of the universe.

The visible is the mother of all things.

By constantly thinking the invisible, we understand the universe;

By constantly observing the visible, we can see how the natural laws work.

Thinking and observing are two different things.

Yet they serve the same goal: to theorize.

Theorizing and evolving these theories is the gate to marvels.

The way that can be talked about is not the eternal Way.

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

"Nothing" is the name of the origin of Heaven and Earth.

"Being" is the name of "the mother" of all things.

So, in eternal Nothing, we should look at the wonderfulness of the Way.

In eternal Being, we should look at its outer aspects.

These two flow from the same source, though differently named; and both are called mysteries.

Mysterious and more mysterious.

That is the door of all wonders.

Tao that can be spoke of, not the eternal Tao.

Name that can be named, not the eternal name.

Nameless, the beginning of heaven and earth.

Named, mother of everything.

Desireless, sees the mystery.

Desiring, sees the manifestations.

These two, from the same source, differ in name; both are original.

Original of original, gate of all mystery.

The Tao that can be spoken of is not the eternal Tao.

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The
nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.

The name is the mother of the ten thousand things.

Send
your desires away and you will see the mystery.

Be filled with desire

and you will see only the manifestation.

As
these two come forth they differ in name.

Yet at their source they are the same.

This source is called a mystery.

Darkness
within darkness,

the gateway to all mystery.

The
atheism that one can come to

by argument

is not true atheism.

A definition given to atheism in one age

is not the unchanging atheism

nor its permanent meaning.

From the original experience

of being human

atheism arises.

Being the original human experience,

it is the parent of all religion.

From theism we derive the essence of atheism,

although from their names, we see only the conflict.

Both ways of experience

have the same origin

only different names.

Their mutual identity is the mystery

of experience.

And
in this mystery

is found

the doorway

to the universe.

The way that can be told of is hardly an eternal, absolute, unvarying one;

the name that can be coded and given is no absolute name.

Heaven and earth sprang from something else: the bright nameless;

the named is but the said mother that rears the ten thousand creatures of heaven
and earth, each after its kind.

He
that rids himself of base desire can see the secret essences;

he that didn't and reached high being, he can see outcomes.

Still the two are the same; the secret and its manifestations came from the
same ground, the same mould, but anyway sound different -

they're given different names where they appear.

They can both be called the cosmic mystery, awesome deep

or rather more secret than so-called mystery.

There's
the deeper mystery: the gate and doorway from which issued all secret essences,
yes, all subleties,

and the subtle mysterial opening homewards.

Call it the door mystery or golden secret of all life.

The ways that can be walked are not the eternal Way;

The names that can be named are not the eternal name.

The nameless is the origin of the myriad creatures;

The named is the mother of the myriad creatures.

Therefore,

Always be without desire in order to observe its wondrous subtleties;

Always have desire so that you may observe its manifestations.

Both of these derive from the same source;

They have different names but the same designation.

Mystery of mysteries,

The gate of all wonders!

The Tao that is the subject of discussion is not the true Tao.

The quality which can be named is not its true attribute.

That which was before Heaven and Earth is called the Non-Existent.

The Existent is the mother of all things.

Therefore doth the wise man seek after the first mystery of the Non-Existent, while seeing in that which exists the Ultimates thereof.

The Non-Existent and Existent are identical in all but name.

This identity of apparent opposites I call the profound, the great deep, the open door of bewilderment.

A Passion Not Tamed by Words

Spinning words together to create vows

will not unite two souls.

Pouring over words in marriage manuals

will not pour spirit into a relationship.

Words may speak of love

but they cannot create it.

The union of one soul with another

is born of a passion that must not be tamed by words.

Let your words be tools of this passion,

not barriers to it.

Words emerging from love's furnace

will be few but powerful.

A few words of understanding

may heal a wounded heart.

A few words of wisdom

may comfort a lonely soul.

A few words of sensuous longing

may kindle love's embraces.

If you could speak but fifty words

each day to your beloved,

only that and no more,

what would be your words today?

The Tao that can be told of is not the eternal Tao; The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The Nameless is the origin of Heaven and Earth; The Named is the mother of all things.

Therefore let there always be non-being, so we may see their subtlety,
And let there always be being, so we may see their outcome.

The two are the same, But after they are produced, they have different names.

They both may be called deep and profound. Deeper and more profound, The door to all subtleties!

Existence is
beyond the power of words

To define:

Terms may be used

But are none of them absolute.

In the beginning of heaven and earth there were no words,

Words came out of the womb of matter;

And whether a man dispassionately

Sees to the core of life

Or passionately

Sees the surface,

The core and the surface

Are essentially the same,

Words making them seem different

Only to express appearance.

If name be needed, wonder names them both:

From wonder into wonder

Existence opens.

The DAO can be talked about, but that is not the ever-lasting DAO.

The NAME can be called, but that is not the ever-lasting NAME.

Nothingness is called the origin of the world.

Existence is called the root of everything.

Therefore,

you should stay in nothingness if you want to see the real essence of the world;

you should stay in existence if you want to see the different entities of the world.

They are from the same source but named differently: both are called XUAN.

Understanding the XUANs is the key to the kingdom of truth.

The Tao Eternal is beyond definition.

No name given can capture its eternality.

Nameless, it is the origin of the Kosmos.

Named, it is the beginning of all things.

Nothingness, it is the inner being of the Kosmos.

Thingness, it is the outer distinctions of the Kosmos.

These two, though different in names, arise from the same source:

The source called the Invisible.

Invisible beyond the invisible,

It is the entry into the myriad wonders of the Eternal Kosmos.

There are ways to follow,

But what is followed is not the true Way.

There are names to give,

But what is given is not the true Name.

Let us call non-being the beginning of the universe

And let us call being the development of all things.

When we follow non-being

We approach the wonder of the Way.

When we follow being

We approach the farther-end manifestation of the Way.

Each has the same origin,

And here exists a metaphysical door to true wisdom.

The Tao that is spoken of, cannot be truly explained.

The grandest eloquence cannot define it.

It has no name, and is the creator of Heaven and Earth.

Forced to name it, we can call it the Tao (the Way), and accept that it is great.

When we are lost in desire we can see only the outer manifestations of this greatness.

If we free ourselves from desire we can experience the unfathomable depths,

and know the mystery of the great Tao.

The Mystery and the Manifestations are separate, yet they arise from the same source.

This source is deep; so deep its depths cannot be plumbed.

Within its depths is darkness. The Great Mystery within the darkness,

it is the gateway to all understanding.

