===== Chapter 21 =====

The forming of exceeding virtue—

Only the Tao indeed manages [to do].

The functioning "substance" of the Tao is only indistinct, only vague.

So vague! So indistinct! Within it exists shape.

So indistinct! So vague! Within it exists the physical world.

So obscure! So profound! Within it exists essence.

Its essence is exceedingly real—

Within it exists the evidence [for this].

From ancient times even unto the present day

Its name has not departed.

Thereby inspect the many beginnings.

How do I thereby know the form of the many beginnings?

With this.

Great Te appears Flowing from Tao.

Tao in action - Only vague and intangible. Intangible and vague, But
within it are images. Vague and intangible; Within are entities. Shadowy
and obscure; Within there is life, Life so real, That within it there
is trust.

From the beginning its name is not lost But reappears through multiple origins.

How do I know these origins? Like this.

It is the mark of great virtue to follow Tao alone.

What can one say of Tao?

It is elusive; it's like a shadow,

It is intangible; it is like haze.

Elusive like a shadow, yet it holds ideas within.

Intangible like haze, yet it holds entities within.

Mysterious and dim, yet it holds spirit within.

Throughout all time

Its name has been retained.

Thus we can view the origin of all things.

How do I know the origin of all things?

I do because of what's within me.

ESSENCE OF TAO

From Tao alone, follows Te,

The absolute manifestation of virtue.

The Tao, tho' so evasive, elusive, intangible -

Subtly within it, deep and obscure,

- Appear images, forms, entities.

- Appear the mystical essence.

The essence - so subtle, yet so real.

From the beginning of time it mysteriously

manifests itself, Providing a fleeting sense of primal power.

How else may Te be known but through this

essence of the Tao ?

The all-embracing action of the soul displays itself the same as the Tao to be followed.

The Tao acts on things entirely elusively and inexplicably.

Inexplicable! Elusive! Its center has form.

Inexplicable! Elusive! Its center has substance.

Deep! Mysterious! Its center contains the life force.

Its life force is very genuine, it can be tested.

Throughout the ages its presence has never ceased.

Witness all things of creation.

How I know all things of creation is through this.

THE INFINITE WOMB

The sole source of energy is the Tao. Who may declare its nature? It is

beyond Sense, yet all form is hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet

all Perceptibles are hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet all

Perceptibles are hidden within it. It is beyond Sense, yet all Being is

hidden within it. This Being excites Perception, and the Word thereof.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, its Name

operateth continuously, causing all to flow in the cycle of Change, which

is Love and Beauty. How do I know this? By my comprehension of the Tao.

True Virtue is born of Reason, The essence of reason is unfathomableand incomprehensible. The faces of reason can not be discerned, The worldthat appears in reason, no one knows how, Impenetrable is the darknesswhere the heart of Being dwells, This being is Truth itself and Faith itself.From eternity to eternity, they will never perish. Who saw the beginningof All. The beginning All, one knows only thru the perennial Spirit.

A righteous and blissful life is approachable only when you follow your conscience

The conscience is invisible and impalpable. How can you follow it?

It speaks through images, like shadows in the dark

But how faintly and obscurely

The conscience is hidden but it carries the essentials of everything inside

The true life-force shelters itself inside conscience

Everything people know deeply inside is stowed within the conscience

It has always been there since the beginning, with many different names

The conscience separates truth from lie

How do I know all this?

My conscience has told me that it's so

Intelligence consists in acting according to Nature.

Nature is something which can neither be seen nor touched. Yet all of the forms which can possibly be seen or touched are latent within it. And all of the things that will actually be seen or touched are embedded as potentialities within it. Deep in its depths are activating forces. No matter how unplumbable the depths, these forces unfailingly sustain the world as it appears to us.

From the beginning until now, they have never ceased to express themselves in appearances.

How do I know all this to be so? It is intuitively self-evident, for every existing thing testifies to it, including what appears right here and now.

Such the scope of the All-pervading Power.

That it alone can act through the Way.

For the Way is a thing impalpable, incommensurable.

Incommensurable, impalpable.

Yet latent in it are forms;

Impalpable, incommensurable

Yet within it are entities.

Shadowy it is and dim;

Yet within it there is a force,

Is none the less efficacious.

From the times of old till now

Its charge has not departed

But cheers onward the many warriors.

How do I know that the many warriors are so?

Through this.

Supreme virtue is to abide in Tao alone.

Tao is elusive and empty—

oh yes, utterly empty and elusive—

yet within it dreamlike images arise.

Oh yes, it is indistinct and nebulous,

but within it shadows take form.

Oh yes, it is mysterious and dark,

but within it appearances originate.

The origin of creation is the real.

Its manifestations are unceasing.

This can be witnessed.

How do I witness the origin of creation?

By looking!

The bearing of true character

Is simply to follow a true path

If the way is regarded as an entity

It is only elusive, only vague

So vague & so elusive

(Yet) at its center there is shape

So elusive & so vague

(Yet) at its center there are beings

So arcane & so shadowy

(Yet) at its center there is seed

This seed is profoundly real

At its center there is truth

From the present back into antiquity

Its meaning does not fade

Through this is seen a common ancestry

How do we know that the common ancestry's shape is thus?

By This

Expressions of Tao

The character of great Virtue

Follows only from the Way.

As for the nature of the Way -

It is without shape or form.

Formless! Shapeless! Inside there are images.

Shapeless! Formless! Inside there are things.

Hidden! Obscure! Inside are there essences.

These essences are very real,

Inside them is the proof.

From the present back to the past,

its name has never gone away.

It is by this that we comply

with the father of the multitude of things.

How do I know the father of the multitude is so?

By this.

The greatest virtue is to follow Tao, and only Tao.

You might say, "But Tao is illusive! Evasive! Mysterious! Dark! How can one follow that?" By following this: Out of silent subtle mystery emerge images. These images coalesce into forms. Within each form is contained the seed and essence of life. Thus do all things emerge and expand out of darkness and emptiness.

Because its essence is real and evident in the origins of all things, the name of the Tao has survived since the beginning of time.

How can I know the circumstances of the origins of all things? Exactly by this phenomenon.

The greatness of modesty is fulfilled

In harmony with the Cosmic Source.

Its nature seems elusive, ephemeral;

It is evanescent, indefinable;

But only because its action is unforced.

It is the very center of the self,

Yet we don't know where it is.

It is the active voice of being:

Formless, and impenetrable to thought,

Yet manifest in every natural act

Through the furthest memory of Time.

It never arrives, never departs;

Its expression fulfills Nature.

It is the child of discernment,

The parent of action.

By what do I know this Essence?

From the formless truth within me.

In this poem, Lao Tzu introduces the concept of Te, or, as I have been guided to render it, the cosmic principle of Modesty. It is a principle that informs natural action, of inner clarity that is inseparable from the outer movement or activity that it inspires. This outer movement is known as wu-wei, or unforced action. It comes from "the very center of the self," where the accretions and distortions of belief and analysis do not exist.

Te is the point at which the Sage, the teaching heart of the Cosmic Whole, intersects with and expresses our deepest true nature. You can't pin it down with definitions because it isn't fixed or formed; it gently and playfully eludes the clutches and machinations of ego (thus, the gentle humor of this poem, and others following, in which the poet sings of Te).

Te is neither attainment nor achievement, because it has never been apart from us: how can you attain something that you've always had, and how can you achieve something that you have always been? It speaks clearly, but does not persuade; it works, but does not strive. Modesty is not the shrinking violet of consciousness, as it is often represented culturally ("rather shy" is one definition of modesty in the Oxford American Dictionary). The modesty that Lao Tzu is encouraging us to discover is expression and action molded from the personal and formless truth within: it is nothing less (or more) than the manifestation of Tao.

The Teh follows Tao.

Tao
is like a dream:

invisible, intangible, obscure.

It
is invisible yet there is a form to it.

It is intangible yet there is a feel to it.

It is obscure yet there is method to it.

The method is true and so there are signs of it.

From
ancient times until now

the signs have never ceased

by which we can still see the beginning.

How can I know the nature of the beginning?

By these signs!

The comprehensiveness of supreme energy is its conformity to the Tao.

The Tao considered as an entity is impalpable, indefinite. Indefinite, impalpable, within are concretions.

Impalpable, indefinite, within are shapes. Profound, obscure, within there is essence. This essence being supremely real, within is sincerity.

From the beginning until now it has not changed, and thus it has watched all the essentials. How do I know it has been thus will all principles? By what has just been said.

The great virtue as manifested is but following Tao.

Tao is a thing that is both invisible and intangible. Intangible and invisible, yet there are forms in it; Invisible and intangible, yet there is substance in it; Subtle and obscure, there is essence in it; This essence being invariably true, there is faith in it.

From of old till now, it has never lost its (nameless) name, Through which the origin of all things has passed.

How do I know that it is so with the origin of all things? By this (Tao).

Guiding and the Physical

The content of permeating virtuosity

is merely following a guide.

To deem guides as a natural kind:

Indeed confused! Indeed indistinct!

Indistinct! Confused!

Within them there are signs.

Confused! Indistinct!

Within them there are natural kinds.

Yawning! Murky!

Within them there is generative energy.

Their energy is optimally authentic.

Within it there is reliability.

From the past to the present

it's name remains.

And elucidates the crowd's honored father.

How do I know the shape of the crowd's honored father?

With this.

That which is inherent in the great attainment (void) is the echo of Tao.

That which is Tao is indistinct and ineffable.

Ineffable and indistinct, yet therein are forms.

Indistinct and ineffable, yet therein are objects.

Unfathomable and invisible, yet therein are essences.

The essence is indeed genuine, therein is the vivid reality.

From ancient times until the present, the name of Tao has never ceased to exist.

Through it we see the beginning of all things.

How do we understand the beginning of all things?

It is through this.

A virtuous person comes into being only according to the Tao.

Tao is something which is obscure and indistinct.

Indistinct and obscure -

yet there is an appearance.

Obscure and indistinct -

yet there is a substance.

Vague and dim -

yet there is an essence within it.

This essence is genuine.

There is truth within it.

Since ancient times until now, its name never forsaken, it stands there to guard all the good deeds.

How do I know all the good deeds are guarded by this Tao?

I know.

The manifestations of grand virtue

Follow only the Tao.

The Tao is something

Faint and dim:

Dim and faint,

Therein lies an image;

Faint and dim,

Therein lies substance.

Deep and remote,

Therein lies quintessence.

Its quintessence is most genuine,

Therein lies truthfulness.

From the present to antiquity,

Its name has never vanished,

Whereby I trace back to

The father of the multitude.

How do I know

What the father of the multitude was like?

From this.

The manifestation of the great virtue is to follow the way of the Tao.

Tao is a thing that is invisible, inaccessible.

Inaccessible, invisible, and yet it has image and form.

Cloudy and obscure, but there is essence in it,

And this essence is absolute truth, and there is belief in it.

From ancient times until now, it has not lost its nameless name,

Through it the source of all things has passed.

How do I know that the source of all things is in it?

From the Tao.

In his every movement a man of great virtue

Follows the way and the way only.

As
a thing the way is

Shadowy and indistinct.

Indistinct and shadowy,

Yet within it is an image;

Shadowy and indistinct,

Yet within it is a substance.

Dim and dark,

Yet within it is an essence.

This essence is quite genuine

And within it is something that can be tested.

From
the present back to antiquity,

Its name never deserted it.

It serves as a means for inspecting the fathers of the multitude.

How
do I know that the fathers of the multitude are like that?

By means of this.

Emptying the Heart

"Vast virtue's form

Follows Reason's norm.

"And Reason's nature

Is vague and eluding.

"How eluding and vague

All types including!

How vague and eluding,

All beings including!

How deep and how obscure.

It harbors the spirit pure,

Whose truth is ever sure,

Whose faith abides for aye

From of yore until to-day.

"Its name is never vanishing,

It heeds the good of everything."

Through what do I know that "it heeds the good of everything"? In this way, verily: Through IT.

The master has separated from mind, and the great virtuous Tao is. The mind is like a foot. If it follows that which is greater it is useful. If it tries to lead of its own volition it will lead to disaster. The Tao is beyond conception, so drop all ideas. If you cling to anything it cannot provide nourishment. Neither inside nor outside, the Tao is non-dual. It can only be known by not knowing.

The Grand Virtue's complexion resembles that of Direction.

Direction, as a matter substantive,

is sometimes indistinct and other times elusive.

Elusive and indistinct, there is image within;

Indistinct and elusive, there is matter within.

Minuscule and mysterious, there are particles within;

These particles are real; there is reality within.

From the present back to the past, its name is never unacknowledged;

it is the foundation of all matters.

How do I know that it is the foundation of all matters?

Through Direction.

The nature of great Integrity is to follow Way absolutely.

Becoming things, Way appears vague and hazy.

All hazy and impossibly vague it harbors the mind's images.

All vague and impossibly hazy it harbors the world's things.

All hidden and impossibly dark it harbors the subtle essence,

and being an essence so real it harbors the sincerity of facts.

Never, not since the beginning - its renown has never been far off.

Through it we witness all origins.

And how can we ever know the form of all origins?

Through this.

Creation of everything in the universe follows only Tao.

The material universe created by Tao seems unclear and blurred:

So blurred and so unclear, yet in it there are images;

So unclear and so blurred, yet in it there are things;

So dim and so invisible, yet in it there is essence.

The essence is very real, and in it there is evidence.

From the beginning until now, the naming has never stopped.

So the beginning of many things may be understood.

How do I know the many situations at the beginning?

Through this.

An
aperture is the appearance of the ideal

Only tao is appropriately followed.

The
action of tao on things,

Only elusive, only ungraspable.

So ungraspable, so elusive

At its center, the presence of form

So elusive, so ungraspable

At its center, the presence of things

So secluded, so hard to see

At its center, the presence of belief.

From
ancient times reaching into the present its name does not depart

Experience of the collective beginning happens.

Why
do I happen to know the shape of the collective beginning is this way?

It just happens.

All of the beings which play a role, in the great manifestation of the cosmic theater, have come from the Principle, through its virtue (its unwinding).

The Principle is indistinct and indeterminate, mysterious and obscure. In its indistinction and indetermination there are types, a multitude of beings. In its mystery and obscurity there is an essence which is reality.

From ancient times until the present, its name (its being) has stayed the same, all beings have come from it.

How do I know that it was the origin of all beings? ... (By objective observation of the universe, which reveals that contingencies must have come from the absolute).

The appearance of great virtue

Follows only the Tao

The Tao, as a thing

Seems indistinct, seems unclear

So unclear, so indistinct

Within it there is image

So indistinct, so unclear

Within it there is substance

So deep, so profound

Within it there is essence

Its essence is supremely real

Within it there is faith

From ancient times to the present

Its name never departs

To observe the source of all things

How do I know the nature of the source?

With this

The Tao is the infinite field of limitless potential. Therefore, the manifestation of inherent power and great virtue of all things can only follow the Tao and come from the Tao.

If we were to regard the Tao as a "thing," it would be indistinct and unclear. The Tao embodies the mystery and the unknown. No matter how close we get to it, it will remain forever beyond complete comprehension. It will always be one step beyond total clarity.

Within this indistinct and unclear Tao, there is the image of the universe. The stars, the galaxies - the cosmos are contained within the Tao.

The Tao is the ultimate source of everything. Although it will always be vague and elusive, it embodies all the potentialities of the physical world. Material things come out of this void, seemingly out of nowhere.

The Tao has unlimited depth, and it is within this depth that we find the essence of life. The principle and driving force of this essence are undeniable. When we examine this essence, we have no choice but to believe that the Tao exists and is quite real.

This is why the Name - the Tao, the great virtue, and power inherent inherent in all things - have never gone away from antiquity to modern times. It is not a passing fad or temporary fixation; it is the enduring and eternal truth.

We can use this truth to observe and understand the universal source of all Creation. So if people were to ask me how I can know anything about the nature of this mystical source, I would simply let them know this is it.

We may never be able to see it with perfect clarity; we may never have complete comprehension of it. Nevertheless, its existence, function and power are absolutely, positively beyond doubt. It is the Tao.

Notes

Life, as we know it, is all based on DNA. In fact, one can even say that it is the genes that perpetuate themselves generation after generation. They surround themselves with sophisticated and complex cellular mechanisms in order to enable this perpetuation.

But, as science writer Bill Bryson points out, DNA is not in itself alive. So at the very core of the phenomenon known as life, we come up against this interesting puzzle, a profound paradox: the fundamental basis of life is not itself a living thing. How can this be? How can it work?

Study this issue long and hard enough, and one may come to a startling realization. We are in fact not biological machines that have learned how to think. Instead, we are pure consciousness that has learned how to manifest in the physical universe through the workings of life. There is something about this metaphysical consciousness that simply wants to be, and it drives the process of life, transforming the inorganic to organic in order to enable its manifestations.

This is genesis. It is not completely understood and perhaps it never will be. It is indistinct and unclear, and yet within it is the seed of infinite life. Our very existence is proof positive of its function and power. It is the Tao.

THE HEART OF EMPTINESS

All the innumerable forms of teh correspond to the norm of Tao, but the nature of the Tao's activity is infinitely abstract and illusive. Illusive and obscure, indeed, but at its heart are forms and types. Vague and illusive, indeed, but at its heart is all being. Unfathomable and obscure, indeed, but at its heart is all spirit, and spirit is reality. At its heart is truth.

From of old its expression is unceasing, it has been present at all beginnings. How do I know that its nature is thus? By this same Tao.

The features (yung) of the vast (k'ung) Te,

Follows entirely (wei) from Tao.

Tao as a thing,

Is entirely illusive (huang) and evasive (hu).

Evasive and illusive,

In it there is image (hsiang).

Illusive and evasive,

In it there is thinghood (wu).

Dark and dim,

In it there is life seed (ching).

Its life seed being very genuine (chen),

In it there is growth power (hsin).

As it is today, so it was in the days of old (ku),

Its name goes not away (ch'ü),

So that we may survey (yüeh) the origins of the many (chung fu).

How do I know that the origins of the many are such?

Because of this.

The Teh follows Tao.

Tao is like a dream: invisible; intangible; obscure. It is invisible yet there is form to it. It is intangible yet there is a feel to it. It is obscure yet there is method to it. The method is true and so there are signs of it.

From ancient times until now the signs have never ceased by which we can see the beginning. How can I know the nature of the beginning? By these signs!

Te flows from Tao.

Tao is elusive and evasive.

Evasive and elusive, yet within it there are ideas.

Elusive and evasive, yet within it are entities.

Dark and obscure, yet within it there is life.

The life of the Tao is so real; it gives rise to certainty.

From the beginning until now, it has appeared in countless forms, it has been given countless names.

How do I know this? Like this!

Twenty-one

The greatest Virtue is to follow Tao and Tao alone.

The Tao is elusive and intangible.

Oh, it is intangible and elusive, and yet within is image.

Oh, it is elusive and intangible, and yet within is form.

Oh, it is dim and dark, and yet within is essence.

This essence is very real, and therein lies faith.

From the very beginning until now its name has never been forgotten.

Thus I perceive the creation.

How do I know the ways of creation?

Because of this.

The forms of the great the Teh (virtue)

Exclusively depend on the Tao.

The Tao as a thing

Is vague and indefinite.

Vague and indefinite,

It presents images;

Indefinite and vague,

It embodies substance.

Distant and dark,

It embraces semen-like essence.

The essence is a genuine existence

That can be tested as true.

From ancient times to now,

Its name has always been accepted,

And with which, the beginning of all things can be surveyed.

How do I know the initial state of all things?

By means of the Tao.

The look of the great Te

Follows from Tao alone.

It is Tao embodied.

How vague and dim it is!

Vague and dim -

In it are forms.

Vague and dim -

In it are things.

Deep and dark -

In it is the vital essence,

Which is most real.

In it is evidence.

From the time of old till today,

Its name has never departed.

By it you view the beginning of all.

How do I know the shape of the beginning of all?

By this.

The demeanour of a man of great virtue is consistent with the way of Dao.

Dao, as an entity, is not tangible.

Though it is intangible, it appears to have some image.

Although it appears nebulous, it has some form.

Though inscrutable and indistinct, it appears to have some vitality.

This vitality is as real as it is creditable.

From antiquity until now, Dao has always existed.

Through following the way of Dao, one tries to understand the beginning of the world.

To understand the beginning of the universe is from the study of Dao.

Hollow Heart

Hsu Hsin

The inherent quality of Grand Virtue (Teh)

Always conforms only to Tao.

Tao is something dreamily winking and waning.

Waning, winking, it embodies forms;

Winking, waning, it embodies things.

It may seem receding afar and darkening,

Yet within it there is an essence.

This essence is very real.

Inside is something invariably vital.

From hoary antiquity to the present time,

Its effect has never gone awry,

And serves as witness to the Creator of all things.

How do I know the way of the Creator?

Through this (witness).

The greatest virtue is but a manifestatio of the Tao.

The Tao itself is intangible, invisible, ungraspable.

Intangible, invisible, ungraspable,

Yet pregnant of things.

Dark, unfathomable,

Yet holding seed.

This seed is truth,

And in this truth is faith.

From immemorial time till now

Its nameless name and nature have not changed.

From it proceed all manifested things.

And how do I know that such is the origin of all manifested things?

How else than through the Tao?

The nature of great virtue

is to follow Tao alone.

And Tao's style is elusive, evasive.

Evasive, elusive

Yet within it is form.

elusive, evasive,

Yet within it is substance.

Dark and dim,

Yet within it is vitality,

Its vitality is very real:

Within it is trust.

From of old

Its name has not ceased,

For it has watched all beginnings.

How can all beginnings be known?

Inward light!

One of deep virtue cherishes the subtle essence of the universe.

The subtle essence of the universe is elusive and evasive.

Though it is elusive and evasive,

it unveils itself as images and forms.

Evasive and elusive,

it discloses itself as indefinable substance.

Shadowy and indistinct,

it reveals itself as impalpable subtle essence.

This essence is so subtle, and yet so real.

It is the subtle origin of the whole of creation and non-creation.

It existed prior to the beginning of time as the single deep and subtle reality of the universe.

It brings all into being.

XXI.

The
Empty Center

The
grandest aspects of producing force

Find
Tao their energizing way and source;

In
Tao things move unseen, impalpable,

Yet
in it form and semblance brood and dwell;

Impalpable,
invisible, yet things

Float
forth within on transcendental wings;

Dark
and profound, yet lo! within it there,

Are
the pure essences which aeons bear;

It
holds the truth, it keeps its ancient name,

And
watches all that from the beginning came;

From
the Beginning! How know I this is so?

By
this, it is the Tao, by this I know!

The complete manifestation of things visible proceeds only from Life.

In its nature Life is always coming into activity, yet in itself it eludes our sight and tough.

Eluding sight! eluding touch!

Within it are hid the plane of created things.

Eluding touch! eluding sight!

Within it are hid all created beings.

It is profound! It is obscure!

Within it is hid pure Spirit.

It is pure Spirit, enfolding Truth!

Within it is hid an infallible witness.

Free of Old until Now

Its Name remains unchanged.

Through its Doorway comes the Universe into existence.

How do I know that the Universe is coming to full perfection through Life?

The witness is in Life itself.

It
lies in the nature of

Power

To
follow the Tao (the Laws of the Universe) and

the
Tao (the Laws of the Universe) alone.

Now
what is the Tao (the Laws of the Universe)?

It
is Something slippery and shifty. Shifty and slippery!

And
yet It contains within Itself a Form. Shifty and slippery!

And
yet It contains within Itself a Substance.

Shadowy
and dim!

And
yet It contains within Itself a Core of Energy ( the Force of Life ).

The
Core of Energy ( Force of Life ) is very real,

It
contains within Itself an unfailing Honesty.

Throughout
the ages

Its
Name has been preserved

In
order to recall the

Beginning
of all things.

(We
can see and hear the background radiation that was the Big Bang the beginning
of

our
Universe.)

How
do I know the ways of all things at the Beginning?

By
what is within me.

(For
are we not made of recycled Star Stuff.)

The outward manifestations of the Grand Virtue proceed exclusively from the Way.

The Way is something utterly vague and intangible. Though intangible and vague, latent in it are Images. Though vague and intangible, latent in it are things. Though impenetrable and obscure, latent in it is infallibility, so that, from of old till now, that name ("Way") has not been discarded in describing the common origin. How do I know the manner of this common origin? From this.

The grandest forms of active force

From Tao come, their only source.

Who can of Tao the nature tell?

Our sight it flies, our touch as well.

Eluding sight, eluding touch,

The forms of things all in it crouch;

Eluding touch, eluding sight,

There are their semblances, all right.

Profound it is, dark and obscure;

Things' essences all there endure.

Those essences the truth enfold

Of what, when seen, shall then be told.

Now it is so; 'twas so of old.

Its name--what passes not away;

So, in their beautiful array,

Things form and never know decay.

How
know I that it is so with all the beauties of existing things? By

this (nature of the Tao).

The nature of great DEI-ty is that it grows within Id alone.
Taken by
itself, objectively, Id is 'blurred' and 'nebulous.'
How
nebulous and blurred!
Yet within Id there are IMAGES.
How blurred and
nebulous!
Yet within Id there are OBJECTS.
How cavernous and dark!

Yet within Id there is an ESSENCE.
It's Essence is quite real;
Within
Id there are TOTEMS.
From
the present back to the ancient past, Id's identity is imperishable.
Through
Id, we conjoin with the Father of the masses.
How
do I know what the Father of the masses is like? THROUGH THIS!

Seeming
utter emptiness

Quite impossible to trace

Yet it contains all images

Within its wide embrace

Appearing
total darkness

Yet you see that it is right

To stay with its obscurity

The only origin of light

This
ever present openness

At center and within

Can be seen just anytime

So look and look again

IT lies in the nature of Grand Virtue

To follow the Tao and the Tao alone.

Now what is the Tao?

It is Something elusive and evasive.

Evasive and elusive!

And yet It contains within Itself a Form.

Elusive and evasive!

And yet It contains within Itself a Substance.

Shadowy and dim!

And yet It contains within Itself a Core of Vitality.

The Core of Vitality is very real,

It contains within Itself an unfailing Sincerity.

Throughout the ages Its Name has been preserved

In order to recall the Beginning of all things.

How do I know the ways of all things at the Beginning?

By what is within me.

The form of great virtue is something that only the Tao can follow.

The Tao as a "thing" is vague and obscure.

How obscure! How vague! Yet in it there is form.

How vague! How obscure! But in it there are things.

How deep! How dark! In it there is an essence.

The essence is so real--therein is belief.

Since before time and space were,

the Tao IS.

It is beyond is and is not.

How do I know this is true?

I look inside myself and see.

The greatest virtue you can have

comes from following only the Tao;

which takes a form that is intangible and evasive.

Even
though the Tao is intangible and evasive,

we are able to know it exists.

Intangible and evasive, yet it has a manifestation.

Secluded and dark, yet there is a vitality within it.

Its vitality is very genuine.

Within it we can find order.

Since
the beginning of time, the Tao has always existed.

It is beyond existing and not existing.

How do I know where creation comes from?

I look inside myself and see it.

All power and effectiveness come from following the law of creation. There is no substitute for knowing how things happen and for acting accordingly.

Everything, like it or not, is bounded by this principle. The principle is like the blueprint for everything.

All power derives from conscious or unconscious cooperation with the principle.

The single principle is manifest everywhere, all the time.

All birth and growth and death that ever happened, or is happening today, or will happen in the future behaves according to this one rule of existence.

To be sure, new forms do emerge with the passage of time, but they still conform to the same old principle.

How do I know that Tao is universal?

I cannot answer that rationally. I know it from being silent. I know it by virtue of God.

The only virtue worth having is that of following the Tao,

and the only thing you can say about the Tao,

Is that it is elusive and evasive.

It is elusive and evasive, yet it can be observed.

It is evasive and elusive, yet it does manifest itself.

It is dim and dark, yet its essence can be grasped.

Its essence is unquestionably genuine. You can put your faith in it.

From the beginning of time until the present,

Its Name has remained.

In it one can see All of Creation.

How do I know where All of Creation comes from?

I know the Tao!

To
attain peace and harmony,

stay focused on the oneness of Infinity.

Infinity
is the intangible potential of all things;

intangible yet manifesting all images,

intangible yet manifesting all substance.

Within
the Infinite void resides the

Infinite potential of all things.

All tangible things are a manifestation of the

Infinite essence.

From
the present, forever into the past,

forever into the future,

Infinity is the homogenous essence.

The potential of all things forever manifest

and forever disintegrate within the Infinite.

How
can I know the manifestations of Infinity?

Because I am at one with Infinity.

Tolerance is a Virtue.

Only Tao professes this.

Only Tao governs things thus.

Very elusive, very evasive; evasive and elusive.

Its Center takes material form, but is elusive and evasive.

Its Center contains images.

Elusive and evasive, its Center contains things.

Deep and Profound, its Center contains its Essence.

Its Essence is very real. Its Center is true.

From the Beginning to the Present, its name has been preserved.

It takes many names.

How do I know the many names it takes ?

By this.

In all that he does, a man of great Virtue follows Tao and Tao alone.

Tao is invisible and intangible.

It is invisible and intangible, yet within is form.

It is intangible and invisible, yet within is substance.

It is dim and obscure, yet within is essence.

This essence is perfectly genuine, and from it faith emerges.

From ancient times until now, its name has not been forgotten,

Since it is perceived in the source of all things.

How do I know that this is the true nature of things?

Through Tao.

To one who keeps the Way, nature bestows its richest gifts.

The working of the Way cannot be clearly stated,

But one can find an image in its vagueness,

Substance in its obscurity,

Essence in its vast, uncertain expanse,

And confirmable manifestations of that essence.

What existed at the earliest beginning

Is existing now, in the developments of all beings,

And that is what helps me to know the nature of all things.

The impression made by magnificent Te comes only from Tao.

Tao is a something but elusive, but evasive. Evasive, elusive, inside it lies the mind's true form. Elusive, evasive, inside it lies something substantial. Shadowy, dim. Inside it lies vital energy. This energy is very strong inside it lies true genuineness.

From ancient times until today Its name has not been forgotten allowing us to see the beginnings of everything.

How do I recognize the form of the beginnings of everything? By this low in the cycle of Change, which is Love and Beauty. How do I know this? By my comprehension of the Dao.

Te comes out from Tao. And Tao abides in the Primordial Depth.

Te is That Which acts and drives. It is as mysterious and hidden as Tao. Yet It also exists!

It can have form.

It possesses power. Its Power surpasses everything existing in this world.

Te can be seen. From ancient times till present, the voice of Te sounds and tells the Will of the Creator to the entire material world.

Where can I see the countenance of Te? Everywhere!

The Virtue (Te) follows the Way (Tao).

The Tao Way cannot be seen or touched,

Although unseen, untouched the Tao Way has forms.

Unseen, untouched it has consistency,

Subtle and hidden it has an essence.

Its essence is eternal, was always in existence,

As source of all things.

How can we know the way creation is done?

By knowing the Tao Way.

The
greatest virtue's ability to accept follows only from the Dao. The Dao takes
its guise as a creature only impalpably and intangibly. Intangible and impalpable
there are foreshadowings within it. Impalpable and intangible there are creatures
within it. Secluded and obscure, there is vitality within it. Its vitality is
exceedingly genuine. Within it there is regularity. From antiquity down to the
present its true name has never been cast aside, and so by means of that true
name the progenitor of the multitudes is to be inspected. How do I know the
guises of the progenitor of the multitudes? By this.

The feature of great virtue is to follow only Tao.

Tao is something elusive and vague!

Though vague and elusive, in it is the image.

Though elusive and vague, in it is the substance.

Obscure and dim, in it is the spirit.

The spirit is truly genuine; in it is credibility.

From ancient times until now,

Its name has never disappeared.

By this the beginning of all things is known.

How can I know the beginning of all things?

By this.

Knowing the Collective Origin

The natural expression of Power

Proceeds only through the Tao.

The Tao acts through Natural Law;

So formless, so intangible.

Intangible, formless!

At its center appears teh Image.

Formless, intangible!

At its center appears Natural Law.

Obscure, mysterious!

At its center appears teh Life Force.

The Life Force is very real;

At its center appears truth.

From ancient times to the present,

Its name ever remains,

Through the experience of the Collectie Origin.

How do I know the way of the Collective Origin?

Through this.

You cannot grasp the Dao. Yet the sage is at one with it always. The sage does not hold firm to concepts, ideas, right or wrong. The Dao is vague and obscure. It is everything and nothing. There is no shape, no form. Yet form and shape are born from it. It is unchanging and has always been. Yet it is always evolving. All this can be seen within. But do not look.

The omnipresent Virtue will take shape

According only to the Way.

The Way itself is like some thing

Seen in a dream, elusive, evading one.

In it are images, elusive, evading one.

In it are things like shadows in twilight.

In it are essences, subtle but real,

Embedded in truth.

From
of old until now,

Under names without end,

The First, the Beginning is seen.

How do I know the beginning of all,

What its nature may be?

By these!

The content of the great "De" (Virtue) is in conformity with Tao.

The thing that is called Tao has no definite form.

So vague and elusive is it,

Yet in it the real exists.

So profound and obscure is it,

Yet in it the subtle essence was contained.

The essence is very concrete, and very real.

From the old time till now, its name stands unworn, by which we may know the beginnings of all things.

How do I know their beginnings?

Only by this (nature of Tao).

A capacity for the virtue of emptiness, this alone allows conformance with the Dao.

The Dao as such is but dim, is but dark.

Dark, oh, dim, oh, but within it some image is there.

Dim, oh, dark, oh, but within it something is there.

Abstruse, oh, indistinct, oh, but within it the essence of things is there.

Its essence is most authentic, for within it authentication occurs.

From antiquity until now, its name has never been revoked.

We use it to convey what the father of everything is.

How do I know that the father of everything is so?

It is by this.

1. The character of great virtue follows alone from the Way.

2. As for the nature of the Way—it's shapeless and formless.

3. Formless! Shapeless! Inside there are images.

4. Shapeless! Formless! Inside there are things.

5. Hidden! Obscure! Inside there are essences.

6. These essences are very real;

7. Inside them is the proof.

8.
From the present back to the past,

9. Its name has never gone away.

10. It is by this that we comply with the father of the multitude [of things].

11. How do I know that the father of the multitude is so?

12. By this.

A Master stays
focused on Tao.

Nothing else, just Tao.

But you can't
pin Tao down--

you can't even see it!

How are you supposed to focus on something like that?

Like this:

First, there's nothing.

Then, the void is filled with images.

Images lead to the creation of objects.

And every object has Tao at its core.

That's the way
it's been, ever since the world began.

How can I be so sure?

I just know.

.

Within the Elusive Way

All-embracing power proceeds only through the Way.

What is called the Way is elusive and intangible.

Intangible and elusive, yet within it are thought-images.

Elusive and intangible, yet within it are objects.

Deep and obscure, yet within it is the life-force.

The life-force is very real, and within it is certainty.

From the ancient times till now

its manifestations have never ceased,

by which we may see the beginning of all things.

How do I know that the beginnings of all things are so?

Through this certainty.

The strength and goal of virtue is the imitation of Tao.

Tao invisible intangible is bot origin and essence of everything visible and tangible.

Invisible intangible it contains the germ of all things.

Invisible intangible it is the original source of all powers.

Invisible intangible it is the original nature of all beings.

In it life is rooted in it there is duration.

Beginning power and completion of all is Tao.

By whom was this knowledge imparted to me?

By Tao.

The Tao Never Leaves This World

Lao Tze says,

The great Teh is comprehensive, and it follows the ways of the Tao.

The Tao is that which is vague and uncertain.

Within the vague and uncertain, there are pictures.

Within the vague and uncertain, there is substance.

Feeble and unclear as it is, there is spirit within.

The spirit is genuine, with credibility within.

From ancient times until now, the Tao has never left this world; it lives with and looks after all things.

How do I know the Tao lives with all things?

From their daily conduct I know.

FINDING THE ESSENCE OF TAO

The
greatest virtue is to follow the Tao;

how it achieves ! without contriving.

The
essence of Tao is dark and mysterious,

having, itself, no image or form.

Yet through its non-being,

are found image and form.

The essence of Tao is deep and unfathomable,

yet it may be known by not trying to know.

The Master keeps her mind

always at one with the Tao;

that is what gives her her radiance.

The Tao is ungraspable.

How can her mind be at one with it?

Because she doesn't cling to ideas.

The Tao is dark and unfathomable.

How can it make her radiant?

Because she lets it.

Since before time and space were,

the Tao is.

It is beyond
is
and
is not.

How do I know this is true?

I look inside myself and see.

The capacity of Grand Virtues is obtained only by following Dao.

Dao is a matter, even though it is indistinct and elusive.

It is elusive and indistinct, yet within it All Images are formed;

It is indistinct and elusive, yet within it All Things are created;

It is shadowy and obscure, yet within it All Vitalities are produced.

It's own vitality is real and valid.

Throughout the past and present the name of Dao has never been dropped.

It observes All Origins.

How do we know that All Origins are so?

By these observations.

The marks of profound action follow only from the Tao.

The substance of Tao is boundless and unfathomable.

Unfathomable and boundless,

In its center there is form;

Boundless and unfathomable,

In its center there is an object;

Embryonic and dark,

In its center there is essence;

The essence is very pure,

In its center there is trust.

From now to the days of old,

Its name never dies,

Because it creates all things in their beginning.

How do I know the source of all beginnings?

From this.

XXI

All
virtue is derived from the tao

Yet the tao's nature is changeable, elusive

Substanceless and formless, yet it produces all shapes

Formless and substanceless, yet it produces all things

Hidden, obscured, yet from it springs all purity, all clarity

From
the present to the past

The thread has never disappeared

And through it we can see the workings of nature

How
do I know this is so?

There is no how, I listen, and I know

The Countenance of Great Virtue

For the countenance of great virtue,

only the Way is to be followed.

As a thing, the Way is abstract and elusive:

elusive and abstract, there are images in it;

abstract and elusive, there is something there.

Recondite, hidden, it has vitality therein:

that vitality is very real;

it has truth therein.

From ancient times to now,

its name is the undeparting;

thereby are seen all beauties.

How do I know all beauties are thus?

By this.

The state of the world follows the Tao.

What is Tao?

It is intangible.

Foggily and hazily there appears to be an image.

Hazily and foggily there seems to be an object.

Distantly and elusively it emerges over there.

It is the truth.

It is believable.

From ancient time, it has been there; everything is following it.

How do I know it is so?

From everything that is observable.

Great Virtue shows itself only in following the Way.

The Way is something elusive and evasive.

Elusive and evasive, and yet it contains within itself an image.

Elusive and evasive, and yet it contains within itself a substance.

Unfathomable and hidden, and yet it contains within itself an essence.

The essence is very real, and contains within itself an unfailing sincerity.

Throughout the ages its name has been preserved because through it we see the beginning of all things.

How do I know the beginning of all things?

Through it.

Holy Virtue follows Tao and Tao alone.

The Tao, elusive and intangible,

yet within has sign,

yet within has things,

dim and dark, yet within has essence.

The essence is very real, can be verified.

From the beginning til now, its name as Nameless.

Use it to view everything.

How do I know the states of everything?

Use this.

The Great Virtue is to follow the Tao and only the Tao.

The
Tao is shadowy and intangible.

Intangible and evasive, and yet within it is a form.

Evasive and intangible, and yet within it is a substance.

Shadowy and dark, and vet within it is a vital force.

This vital force is real and can be relied upon.

From
ancient times to the present the Tao's instructions

have not been forgotten.

Through it can be perceived the beginning of the story

of life.

How do I know how it was at the beginning of the story

of life?

Because of what is within me.

The
universe acts only according to the laws of nature

even though such laws may seem chaotic and elusive.

Chaotic

still there are patterns.

Elusive

still there is life.

Mysterious and obscure

still it contains the essential.

Power that is immeasurable

still is true and active

from
before the beginning

til after the end,

through the next beginning and ending.

How
do any of us know this?

Look inside.

The marks of great virtue follow alone from the (one) dao.

What's called one dao seems impalpable and vague, not to be measured at all.

Dao is an elusive, virtually incommensurable form, but eluding, elusive it contains
sub-forms.

Within it lie idea-images of coming things, within it are some shadowy entities
or some dormant, vibrant life force of the firstborn, dim essence - even of
objects, somehow, but much rarefied - latent in the essence is the life-force.

The life-force is real and to be trusted.

It's true, and can be set to operate.

and latent in it are evidences.

From the days of old till now

its chunks havent departed or ceased,

By its chunks we can view some origin of all descended units.

How do I know a father of a thing? How to know how some origin of a manifestation
is formed?

By much developed intuition, possibly.

The appearance of grand integrity is that it follows the Way alone.

The Way objectified is blurred and nebulous.

How nebulous and blurred!

Yet within it there are images.

How blurred and nebulous!

Yet within it there are objects.

How cavernous and dark!

Yet within it there is an essence.

Its essence is quite real;

Within it there are tokens.

From the present back to the past,

Its name has been imperishable.

Through it we conform to the father of the masses.

How do I know what the father of the masses is like?

Through this.

The greatest virtue is in simply following Tao, the intangible, inscrutable.

Inscrutable, intangible, and yet containing forms.

Intangible, inscrutable, and yet containing things.

Profound and obscure, but having an essence, a veritable essence in which is consistence.

From eternity until now its nature has remained unchanged.

It inheres in all things from their beginnings.

How do I know of the origin of things?

I know by Tao.

Illumination

There is a light that fills the cosmos.

It is the unified field of energy that

some call God,

some call Mystery,

some call the Tao,

and some give no name at all.

It doesn't matter what you call the light.

But realize that it manifests

in a special manner

in your relationship.

It illuminates your life together

and cannot be hidden

or extinguished.

Sit in silence and look attentively

at each other this evening.

Do you see the light?

Look carefully.

The all-embracing quality of the great virtue follows alone from the Tao.

The thing that is called Tao is eluding and vague. Vague and eluding,
there is in it the form. Eluding and vague, in it are things. Deep and
obscure, in it is the essence. The essence is very real; in it are
evidences.

From the time of old until now, its name (manifestations) ever remains. By which we may see the beginning of all things.

How do I know that the beginning of all things are so? Through this (Tao).

The surest test
if a man be sane

Is if he accepts life whole, as it is,

Without needing by measure or touch to understand

The measureless untouchable source

Of its images,

The measureless untouchable source

Of its substances,

The source which, while it appears dark emptiness,

Brims with a quick force

Farthest away

And yet nearest at hand

From oldest time unto this day,

Charging its images with origin:

What more need I know of the origin

Than this?

Only the DAO has the behavior of the most magnificent DE.

The DAO looks elusive and vague.

It seems abstract, but it has the world as its foundation.

It appears intangible and far away, but it contains the basic elements of the world.

These elements are present everywhere, making its existence known.

From the beginning to the present, the name of the DAO has always existed,

Experiencing all generations.

How do I know everything in the past? Because I know the DAO.

The outer expression of great virtue

follows the inner subtlety of the Tao.

Yet,

the inner subtlety of the Tao

is altogether elusive and ineffable.

Elusive and ineffable, yet there arises some image within;

Ineffable and elusive, yet there exists some thing within;

Cavernous and dark, yet there is some essence within;

This essence is entirely real; in it is Kosmic Integrity.

Hitherto, the name of Kosmic Integrity has endured,

And remains the Principle of Kosmic Creation and Decreation.

By what means do I know the Principle of Kosmic Creation and Decreation?

By means of Kosmic Integrity itself.

To one who keeps the Way, nature bestows its richest gifts.

The working of the Way cannot be clearly stated,

But one can find an image in its vagueness,

Substance in its obscurity,

Essence in its vast, uncertain expanse,

And confirmable manifestations of that essence.

What existed at the earliest beginning

Is existing now, in the developments of all beings,

And that is what helps me to know the nature of all things.

The form of great virtue is something that only the Tao can follow.

The Tao as a "thing" is vague and obscure.

How obscure! How vague! Yet in it there is form.

How vague! How obscure! But in it there are things.

How deep! How dark! In it there is an essence.

The essence is so real--therein is belief.

Since before time and space were,

the Tao IS.

It is beyond is and is not.

How do I know this is true?

I look inside myself and see.

