===== Chapter 15 =====

Those of old who were good at being warriors

Were subtly, wonderfully, mystically in communication

With profundities that can't be fathomed.

Precisely because [the ancient warriors] can't be fathomed

Is the reason one is forced to take them by appearances:

Cautious... as if in winter, crossing a stream

Strategizing... as if they feared their own four neighbors.

Dignified... they seemed forgiving.

Scattered... like ice floes about to break apart.

Honest... they seemed plain and simple.

Free from worries and petty ideas... they seemed [as open] as a valley.

[Apparently] acting without a plan... they seemed muddled.

Calm... they seemed like the ocean.

Like wind in the mountains... they seemed to be without stagnation.

Who can, in muddiness, use the gradual purification of stillness?

Who can, in serenity, use the gradual arising of movement?

They who hold to this Tao do not desire to overflow.

It's only by not overflowing

That one can therefore be shielded

And newly made.

The ancients who followed Tao: Dark, wondrous, profound, penetrating. Deep beyond knowing.

Because they cannot be known, They can only be described. Cautious, like
crossing a winter stream. Hesitant, like respecting one's neighbours.
Polite, like a guest.

Yielding, Like ice about to melt; Blank, like uncarved wood. Open, like a valley. Mixing freely, like muddy water.

Calm the muddy water, It becomes clear. Move the inert, It comes to life.?

Those who sustain Tao Do not wish to be full. Because they do not wish to be full They can fade away Without further effort.

The ancient followers of Tao were shrewd and discerning.

Their knowledge was arcane, beyond comprehension.

There are no words that describe them well.

Cautious, as if fording a frozen river.

Watchful, as if dreading foes on all sides.

Courteous, like a guest.

Yielding, like ice on the thaw.

Simple, like uncut wood.

Wide open, like a valley.

Obscure, like murky water.

Who can keep murky water still and cause it to clear?

Who can make what's inert active and bring it to life?

Those who follow Tao have no wish to become full.

Thus they can wear out with no need to be renewed.

ANCIENT MASTERS

The ancient masters and rulers,

So subtle and mysterious,

profound and penetrating,

Too deep to directly comprehend -

May be known by their appearance,

Cautious - As if crossing a frozen stream.

Watchful - As if fearing danger all around.

Courteous - As if a visiting guest.

Yielding - As if ice about to melt.

Genuine - As if a piece of uncarved wood.

Receptive - As if an open valley.

Opaque - As if in muddy waters.

Waiting quietly while the mud settles,

Remaining still until the moment for action,

They, who embrace this Tao,

Obtaining just that which is sufficient,

AlI needs are satisfied.

Thus they long endure.

The masters* of ancient times could penetrate subtle mysteries too intense to be comprehended.

Students** of the Tao are truly not able to understand and feel compelled to describe these mysterious qualities.

Be hesitant, like crossing a river in winter.

Watchful! Like standing in awe of all four directions.

Reserved! And behave like a guest.

Yielding! Like melting ice.

Genuine! Like the natural state of uncarved wood or uncut jade.

Empty! Like a valley.

Turbulence! Like churning waters.

Who can be still and slowly calm the churning waters?

Who can be tranquil with this motion to insure the gradual birth?

The Tao is not depleted by deep-seated desires.

Separation from deep-seated desires is not new.

It completes.

* person who knows all from 1 to 10 (1 indicates Heaven, and 10 indicates being centered in the four directions)

** upstanding community member who is trying to do things correctly.

THE APPEARANCE OF THE TRUE NATURE

The adepts of past ages were subtle and keen to apprehend this Mystery,

and their profundity was obscurity unto men. Since then they were not

known, let me declare their nature.

To
all seeming, they were fearful as men that cross a torrent in winter

flood; they were hesitating like a man in apprehension of them that are

about him; they were full of awe like a guest in a great house; they were

ready to disappear like ice in thaw; they were unassuming like unworked

wood; they were empty as a valley; and dull as the waters of a marsh.

Who
can clear muddy water? Stillness will accomplish this. Who can

obtain rest? Let motion continue equably, and it will itself be peace.

The
adepts of the Tao, conserving its way, seek not to be actively self-

conscious. By their emptiness of Self they have no need to show

their youth and perfection; to appear old and imperfect is their

privilege.

The great sages of antiquity were wise and intuitive. It is difficultto comprehend their depth. They were cautious like men who are crossingan ice covered river, Cautious like people wary of certain neighbors. Reservedas only guests are. Relenting like melting ice, plain as uncut timber,open like a valley. Dark as deep water. Who can as they interpret the turbulentthru serenity? Who can as they thru their own lives revive the dead souls?Who is filled with serene thoughts desires no other fulfillment, Who desiresno other fulfillment is not attacked by novelties of the day. Such mancan be of simple status yet reach perfection.

The wise of old were profound and acute

People thought of them as unfathomable

Because they where unfathomable, I'll try to sketch their way of living:

They seemed cautious, like people who cross a wintry river

They seemed irresolute, as if danger was threatening everywhere

They seemed dignified, as if they where guests

They seemed natural, like raw wood

They seemed empty, like a valley

They seemed opaque, like muddy water

How can one make muddy water clear?

Stagnation will settle the mud down and the water will become clear

Let everything happen as it happens and you will come to rest

The head of the wise is empty, he does not search for anything and expects nothing

He is empty, everlasting, youthful and not caught in time

He is perfect

In primitive times, intelligent men had an intuitively penetrating grasp of reality which could not be stated in words.

Since their instinctive beliefs have not been recorded for us, we can only infer them from old sayings which have come down to us. Regarding caution when crossing a stream in winter: the more nervous you are, the more likely you are to slip and fall: Regarding suspicion of enemies; the more you fear others, the more the will be afraid of you: Regarding courtesy as a guest: the longer you stay, the more you become indebted to your host.

Regarding melting ice: the more you do to prevent it from melting, the quicker it melts. Regarding making furniture: the more you carve the wood, the weaker it gets. Regarding digging ditches: the steeper you slope their sides, the sooner they will wash down. Regarding muddy water: The more you try to stir the dirt out of it, the murkier it gets.

What, then, should we do in order to clear the muddy water? Leave it alone and the dirt will settle out by itself. What, then, must we do in order to achieve contentment? Let each thing act according to its own nature, and it will eventually come to rest in its own way.

Those who fully comprehend the true nature of existence do not try to push things to excess. And because they do not try to push things to excess, they are able to satisfy their needs repeatedly without exhausting themselves.

Of old those that were the best officers of Court

Had inner natures subtle, abstruse, mysterious, penetrating,

Too deep to be understood.

And because such men could not be understood

I can but tell of them as they appeared to the world:

Circumspect they seemed, like one who in winter crosses a stream,

Watchful, as one who must meet danger on every side.

Ceremonious, as one who pays a visit;

Yet yielding, as ice when it begins to melt.

Blank, as a piece of uncarved wood;

Yet receptive as a hollow in the hills.

Murky, as a troubled stream —–

(Tranquil, as the vast reaches of the sea,

Drifting as the wind with no stop.)

Which of you an assume such murkiness,

To become in the end still and clear?

Which of you can make yourself insert,

To become in the end full of life and stir?

Those who possess this Tao do not try to fill themselves to the brim,

And because they do not try to fill themselves to the brim,

They are like a garment that endures all wear and need never be renewed.

The old masters were deep, unfathomable,

profound beyond understanding.

Because they were unfathomable

we can only describe their demeanor.

Cautious, as if crossing an icy stream.

Alert, as if sensing danger.

Respectful, like visiting guests.

Yielding, like melting ice.

Simple, like uncarved wood.

Open, like beckoning valleys.

Mysterious, like opaque pools.

Still the mind and the mud settles.

Do nothing and action comes of itself.

One who embraces Tao has no desire for fulfillment.

Not desiring fulfillment, he is finished with birth and death.

The ancients who had skill at practicing the way

Were subtle & mysterious, profound & penetrating

A depth not easy to fathom

Inasmuch as they were not easy to fathom

It is thus an effort to construct their appearance

So ready-

As if fording a stream in winter

So vigilant-

As if wary of (all) four neighbors

So dignified-

As though they were guests

So relenting-

Like ice which is about to melt

So artless-

As though they were of unworked wood

So expansive-

As though they were watersheds

So intermingled-

As though they were turbid streams

Who is able, (as) a turbid stream, to become still

and arrive by degrees at clarity?

Who is able, at peace, to become energetic

and arrive by degrees at vitality?

Whoever preserves this path

Not longing for more than fullness

Only those not overfull

Can then stay obscure

and not begin to be finished

The Saints

The one who was skilled at practicing Tao in antiquity,

was subtle, mysterious, profound, and penetratingly wise.

His depth cannot be known.

It is only because he cannot be known,

That therefore, were I forced to describe him, I'd say:

Hesitant was he!,

Like someone crossing a winter stream.

Undecided was he!,

As though he was in fear of neighbors on all four sides.

Solemn and polite was he,

Like a visiting guest.

Scattered and dispelled was he!

Like ice that is about to melt.

Genuine unformed was he,

Like uncarved blocks of wood.

Merged, undifferentiated was he,

Opaque, like a muddy pool.

Broad and expansive was he,

Like a valley.

If you take a muddy pool and still it,

It gradually becomes clear.

If you bring something to rest in order to move it,

It gradually comes alive.

The one who preserves this Tao does not desire to become fulfilled.

Therefore he can wear out with no need to be renewed.

A sage is subtle, intuitive, penetrating, profound. His depths are mysterious and unfathomable.

The best one can do is describe his appearance: The sage is alert as a person crossing a winter stream; as circumspect as a person with neighbours on all four sides; as respectful as a thoughtful guest;

as yielding as melting ice; as simple as uncarved wood; as open as a valley; as chaotic as a muddy torrent.

Why "chaotic as a muddy torrent"? Because clarity is learned by being patient in the heart of chaos. Tolerating disarray, remaining at rest, gradually one learns to allow muddy water to settle and proper responses to reveal themselves.

Those who aspire to Tao don't long for fulfillment. They selflessly allow the Tao to use and deplete them; They calmly allow the Tao to renew and complete them.

The one who wrote these bone-old words

Set out to draw the veil of Mystery

From the truth of his moment.

It was impenetrable to logic,

But the subtle dance of verse

Could pierce the appearance,

And neutralize the profundity.

He was cautiously humble,

As if walking on ice.

Ever conscious of danger,

He approached his undertaking

With watchful reserve,

Like a visitor to far-off shores:

Pliant, like ice in the spring,

Malleable, like fresh yew,

Open, like a mountain valley.

In utter stillness, he watched himself

As if he were a murky pool of water;

Until his mud had settled

And clarity had been restored.

He learned to shed excess, and to seek fulfillment

Solely through diminishment.

In renouncing want, he received abundance in his old age,

In surrendering advantage, he shredded the wisdom of his era

And thus transformed it.

Under the guidance of the Sage, I have recast this poem as a description of Lao Tzu himself, and his approach to exploring the Tao through this marvelous set of teaching poems. This is really a very short step from traditional translations, which have Lao Tzu describing the experiences of "ancient Masters." Clearly, Lao Tzu is not in the camp that deifies ancient masters, and he would certainly be horrified at his own deification at the hands of religious Taoists in the centuries after him.

This was revealed to me in a meditation image as I began the work of this rendering of the Tao Te Ching: I saw Lao Tzu standing uncomfortably on a very high pedestal of glistening ivory. I approached the pedestal, looked up at him, and then kicked hard at the base of the pedestal, which shattered, collapsing the whole. The old philosopher came tumbling down but landed on his feet. He smiled, reached out his hand toward me, and said, "thanks." This meditation (aside from providing me a great laugh) taught me a great deal about how to approach a new rendering of the Tao Te Ching, and it also taught me that Lao Tzu is still very much present in consciousness, and that he remains available to help and to teach—not as a god or a legend of an old and revered book, but as a living, conscious presence. In reference to this poem in particular, the Sage showed me that Lao Tzu had unconsciously written a sort of inner autobiography in verse, and that this is how I could present it in English.

Everyone, without exception, has the inner wherewithal to experience art and nature this way—just look within make that peculiar connection with the Tao that only you can make with it.

The Tao of the Ancients

The
ancient followers of the Tao:

so wise, so subtle, so profound,

so deeply understanding,

that they were themselves misunderstood.

They must therefore be described.

Cautious,
like crossing a stream in mid-winter;

observant, like moving in fear through hostile land;

modest, retiring like ice beginning to melt;

dignified, like an honored guest;

genuine, like natural, untouched wood;

receptive, like an inviting, open valley;

friendly, like muddied water, freely mixing.

Who
can make sense of a world like cloudy water?

Left alone and still, it becomes clear.

Should this stillness be maintained?

Moving hastily will surely cloud it again.

How then can one move and not become clouded?

Accept
Tao and achieve without being selfish;

being unselfish one endures the world's wear,

and needs no change of pace.

Profound indeed were the most excellent among the ancients, penetrating, fathomless; inasmuch as they were fathomless it becomes necessary to employ far fetched symbols when speaking of them.

Irresolute – as if fording a stream in winter.

Timid – as though fearful of their neighbours.

Grave – as if they were guests.

Elusive – like ice about to melt.

Simple – like raw material.

Expansive – like the space between hills.

Turbid – like muddy water.

Who can still the turbid and make it gradually clear; or quiet the active so that by degrees it shall become productive? Only he who keeps this Tao, without desiring fullness. If one is not full it is possible to be antiquated and not newly fashioned.

In old times the perfect man of Tao was subtle, penetrating and so profound that he can hardly be understood.

Because he cannot be understood, I shall endeavour to picture him: He is cautious, like one who crosses a stream in winter; He is hesitating, like one who fears his neighbours; He is modest, like one who is a guest;

He is yielding, like ice that is going to melt; He is simple, like wood that is not yet wrought; He is vacant, like valleys that are hollow; He is dim, like water that is turbid.

Who is able to purify the dark till it becomes slowly light? Who is able to calm the turbid till it slowly clears? Who is able to quicken the stagnant till it slowly makes progress?

He who follows these principles does not desire fullness. Because he is not full, therefore when he becomes decayed he can renew.

Mastering Guiding Discourse

Those in ancient times who were good at deem: acting as scholars

Were subtlety mysterious and profoundly receptive

Unfathomably deep.

Now, precisely because unfathomable,

We must force a description of them.

Cautious: like crossing a stream in winter.

Ambivalent: like fearing those on all sides.

Exacting: like being a guest

Mutable: like ice on the point of melting

Unaffected: like uncarved wood.

Munificent: like a valley

Obscure: like muddied water

Who can, while muddy, using calmness gradually become clear?

Who can, while at ease, using activity gradually come to life.?

She who embraces this guiding discourse

doesn't desire fulfilling.

Now precisely because not fulfilled,

she can obscure and not newly fabricate.

In ancient times the best man of Tao was refined and deeply enlightened.

His depth can hardly be measured.

Because his depth can hardly be measured,

I will try to draw a picture of him.

Prudent, as if he were wading in a cold stream in the winter;

Calm, as if he did not want to disturb his neighbors;

Respectful, as if he were a guest;

Fluid, as if he were ice melting;

Solid, as if he were an uncarved block;

Vacant, as if he were a valley;

Lacking clear discriminations, as if he were impure;

Who is able to gradually reach purity from impurity through quiescence?

Who is able to gradually grow lively from motion through motionlessness?

One who abides in Tao never desires to reach an extreme.

Because he never desires to reach an extreme,

He can remain in the old, yet become the new.

Since ancient times, he who is versed in the Tao has been regarded as subtle, mysterious and obscurely discerning, too profound to be understood.

And because he is elusive, one is barely able to describe him.

Prudent as if fording a stream in winter.

Wary as if in fear of those around him.

Formal as if holding a memorial ceremony.

He lets his heart yield like melting ice.

He keeps his character rough like uncarved wood.

He makes his mind empty like a spacious valley.

He is opaque like muddy water.

There is one who remains still while the mud settles and the water clears itself.

There is one who remains quiet and finds that the moment of action arises of its own accord.

There is one who follows the Tao and does not seek plenitude simply because he is not fulfilled.

In that way he can be named and reach the Tao.

In antiquity, he who excelled in implementing the Tao

Was minutely discerning and subtly perceptive,

Profound beyond recognition.

As he was beyond recognition,

I reluctantly depict him thus:

"Undecided, as if in winter, wading through water;

Hesitant, as if fearing the four neighbors;

Awe-inspiring, like a guest;

Melting, like ice thawing;

Simple, like the unhewn log;

Turbid, like muddy water;

Expansive, like a valley.

In muddy water, he stilled it

And gradually made it limpid;

In comfort, he stirred it

And gradually made it vital."

Those who treasure this Tao

Do not wish to be full,

Hence, they can remain ragged and imperfect.

Long ago, the man of Tao was learned, incisive,

And so profound that it was difficult to comprehend him.

Since it is impossible to understand him, I will try to sketch his image:

He is cautious, like a person crossing a stream during the winter.

He is hesitant, like a person who fears his neighbors.

He is modest, like a person who is another's guest.

He is unassuming, like ice that slowly melts.

He is simple, like a log that has not been carved.

He is hollow, like a valley surrounded by mountains.

He is dim, like stagnant and murky water.

And who is the person who can clear the darkness until it begins to glow?

And who is the person who can purify the murky water until it becomes clear?

And who is the person who can nudge the stagnant along until it begins to move?

The one who follows the principles does not seek fullness.

Since he is not full, when he falls, he can renew himself.

Of old he who was well versed in the way

Was minutely subtle, mysteriously comprehending,

And too profound to be known.

It is because he could not be known

That he can only be given a makeshift description:

Tentative,
as if fording a river in winter,

Hesitant, as if in fear of his neighbors;

Formal like a guest;

Falling apart like the thawing ice;

Thick like the uncarved block;

Vacant like a valley;

Murky like muddy water.

Who
can be muddy and yet, settling, slowly become limpid?

Who can be at rest and yet, stirring, slowly come to life?

He who holds fast to this way

Desires not to be full.

It is because he is not full

That he can be worn and yet newly made.

The Revealers of Virtue

Those of yore who have succeeded in becoming masters are subtile, spiritual, profound, and penetrating. On account of their profundity they can not be understood. Because they can not be understood, therefore I endeavor to make them intelligible.

How cautious they are! Like men in winter crossing a river. How reluctant! Like men fearing in the four quarters their neighbors. How reserved! They behave like guests. How elusive! They resemble ice when melting. How simple! They resemble rough wood. How empty! They resemble the valley. How obscure! They resemble troubled waters.

Who by quieting can gradually render muddy waters clear? Who by stirring can gradually quicken the still?

He who cherishes this Reason is not anxious to be filled. Since he is not filled, therefore he may grow old; without renewal he is complete.

All past masters of the Tao had deep penetration of the subtle. This subtlety cannot be understood. Therefore the masters seem mysterious. All we can describe is their manner. They took care with every action, Watched like a hawk, Respected all, Adapted to every situation; and were firm inside so their clarity was always evident. Practice stilling the mind amidst everyday life, till it clears. Remain unmoved till the movement comes of its own accord.

Don't try to fulfill the Tao, but remain empty. Only by being empty can you be filled.

One who understood Direction in olden days knew the tiniest, appreciated the profoundest, and was deep beyond [our] comprehension.

Since such a person is beyond [our] comprehension, he/she can only be described superficially:

as deliberate as approaching a deep channel in the winter,

as alert as keeping watch over bordering states,

as diplomatic as an envoy in presenting,

as graceful as ice in slow melting,

as simple as a block of uncarved wood,

as calm as a valley's mood,

as accommodating as muddy water,

as expansive as the sea,

as unending as the wind.

Who can calm the muddy to let it distill?

Who can motivate the serene to let it instill?

One who understands Direction never fills to the brim.

Not filled to the brim,

one is at ready to remove the old and substitute it with new.

Ancient masters of Way

all subtle mystery and dark-enigma vision:

they were deep beyond knowing,

so deep beyond knowing

we can only describe their appearance:

perfectly cautious, as if crossing winter streams,

and perfectly watchful, as if neighbors threatened;

perfectly reserved, as if guests,

perfectly expansive, as if ice melting away,

and perfectly simple, as if uncarved wood;

perfectly empty, as if open valleys,

and perfectly shadowy, as if murky water.

Who's murky enough to settle slowly into pure clarity,

and who still enough to awaken slowly into life?

If you nurture this Way, you never crave fullness.

Never crave fullness

and you'll wear away into completion.

A good practitioner of Tao of old is:

A man of subtlety with deep insight,

But it is too profound to understand

Simply because he cannot be understood, one has to describe him as follow:

Cautious, like one crossing a frozen stream in winter;

Hesitant, like one fearing his surrounding neighbours;

Reserved, like a polite guest;

Supple, like ice about to melt;

Honest, like a piece of of virgin wood;

Open-minded, like a valley; and

Confused, like muddy water.

Who can get rid of the muddiness?

It gradually clears though stillness.

Who can revitalize it after long stillness?

It gradually returns to life through activities.

A practitioner of Tao has no desire for filling to brim.

Just because of no filling to the brim,

He will not be worn out but be renewed.

Those
ancients who valued action in the tao

Were insightful, versatile, far-reaching, coherent.

Penetrating,
one cannot understand

In the end it is only that one cannot understand

So there is more than appears to their actions.

So
resigned, like fording a river in winter

Just so, like respecting all four neighbors

So reserved, like making an appearance

So melting, like ice halfway released

So genuine, like their true nature

So spacious, like a valley

So well mixed, like muddy water.

Who
is able to gently calm muddy water, clearing it?

Who is able to endure gently stirring tranquillity so it gives birth?

Those
who maintain this tao have no desire for fullness

In
the end only lack fullness

So be able to be shabby yet perfect the new.

The ancient Sages were subtle, abstract, profound, in a way that cannot be expressed in words.

Therefore I am going to use illustrative comparisons in order to make myself as clearly understood as possible. They were circumspect like on who crosses an ice-covered river; prudent like one who knows that his neighbours have their eyes on him; reserved like a guest in front of his host.

They were indifferent like melting ice (which is neither one thing nor the other). They were unsophisticated like a tree trunk (the rough bark of which conceals the excellent heartwood). They were empty like a valley (with reference to the mountain that form it). They were accommodating like muddy water, (they, the clear water, not repelling the mud, not refusing to live in contact with the common people, not forming a separate group).

(To seek purity and peace by separating from the world is to overdo things. They can be found in the world). Purity is to be found in the trouble (of this world) through (interior) calm, on condition that one does not let the impurity of the world affect oneself. Peace is to be found in the movement (of this world) by one who knows how to take part in this movement, and who is not exasperated through desiring that is should be stopped.

He who keeps to this rule of not being consumed by sterile desires arising from his own fancy, will live willingly in obscurity, and will not aspire to renew the world.

The Tao masters of antiquity

Subtle wonders through mystery

Depths that cannot be discerned

Because one cannot discern them

Therefore one is forced to describe the appearance

Hesitant, like crossing a wintry river

Cautious, like fearing four neighbors

Solemn, like a guest

Loose, like ice about to melt

Genuine, like plain wood

Open, like a valley

Opaque, like muddy water

Who can be muddled yet desist

In stillness gradually become clear?

Who can be serene yet persist

In motion gradually come alive?

One who holds this Tao does not wish to be overfilled

Because one is not overfilled

Therefore one can preserve and not create anew

We can learn much from the ancient masters. Their understanding of the Tao was so advanced that it may seem too subtle and profound for us. Rather than to force ourselves to understand them, we can learn by observing and emulating their behavior.

They lived life in a cautious way, not given to frivolous or reckless acts. They resolved issues by carefully considering all sides, and would never jump to conclusions. They handled responsibilities with serious regard, and would never do anything in a perfunctory way.

This does not mean the masters were uptight. Quite the contrary. They were always relaxed and unattached as they went about their activities. This took nothing away from their serious concern for others and their careful handling of life's challenges. These ancient masters could be relaxed without being lax, and thus achieve excellence effortlessly. They could be unattached without being uncaring, and thus focus on the process instead of the end product.

Another defining characteristic of the masters is the simplicity they practiced in every aspect of life. In their words, actions, and surroundings, simple and uncluttered plainness is the rule rather than the exception. By keeping everything simple, they gained peace of mind as well as the joie de vivre.

The ancient sages were also known for their openness of mind and heart. They gladly considered new ideas and would never dismiss anything out of hand. They treated everyone, even difficult people, with infinite patience and would never prejudge them.

Despite their spiritual and mental refinements, these masters never put themselves on display. They had no interest in showing off their brilliance. Instead, they were humble and fully of self-effacing humor.

People who did not know the sages very well would never see through the outward appearance to perceive their high levels of intelligence and capabilities. It was only in the course of time that people gradually saw the true picture, like muddy water slowly becoming clear.

The composure and serenity of these masters could be easily mistaken for passivity or apathy. This was because most people could not understand how anyone could embody both tranquility and dynamism simultaneously.

The ancient sages did nothing to clarify whatever misconceptions people around them might have. This was because they were never full of themselves. They never assumed they knew it all. Their definite preference was to cultivate quietly to preserve a sense of calmness in everything they did, without drawing attention to themselves, or creating a disturbance.

THAT WHICH REVEALS TEH

In olden times the ones who were considered worthy to be called masters were subtle, spiritual, profound, wise. Their thoughts could not be easily understood.

Since they were hard to understand I will try to make them clear. They were cautious like men wading a river in winter. They were reluctant like men who feared their neighbors. They were reserved like guests in the presence of their host. They were elusive like ice at the point of melting. They were like unseasoned wood. They were like a valley between high mountains. They were obscure like troubled waters. (They were cautious because they were conscious of the deeper meanings of life and its possibilities.)

We can clarify troubled waters by slowly quieting them. We can bring the unconscious to life by slowly moving them. But he who has the secret of the Tao does not desire for more. Being content, he is able to mature without desire to be newly fashioned.

Those in the past who were good at practicing Tao,

Were subtle, mysterious, dark, penetrating (wei miao yüan t'ung),

Deep and unrecognizable.

Because they were unrecognizable,

I am forced to describe their appearance (yung).

Careful, like crossing a river in winter,

Hesitating, like fearing neighbors on four sides,

Reverent, like being guests,

Dissolving, like ice beginning to melt,

Thick, like uncarved wood,

Open, like a valley,

Chaotic (hun), like murky (cho) water.

What can stop the murkiness?

Quieting (ching) down, gradually it clarifies (ch'ing).

What can keep still for long?

Moving, gradually it stirs into life.

Those who keep this Tao,

Do not want to be filled to the full (ying).

Because they are not full,

They can renew (hsin) themselves before being worn out (pi).

The Tao of the Ancients

The ancient followers of Tao: so wise, so subtle, so profound, so deeply understanding that they were themselves misunderstood. They must therefore be described:

Cautious, like crossing a stream in mid-winter; observant, like moving in fear through hostile land; modest, retiring like ice beginning to melt; dignified, like an honored guest; genuine, like natural, untouched wood; receptive, like an inviting, open valley; friendly, like muddied water, freely mixing.

Who can make sense of a world like cloudy water? Left alone and still, it becomes clear. Should this stillness be maintained? Moving hastily will surely cloud it again. How then can one move and not become clouded? Accept Tao and achieve without being selfish; being unselfish one endures the world's wear, and needs no change of pace.

The Tao–Masters of old had profound wisdom and deep understanding.

They were unfathomable.

We cannot comprehend them; all we can do is describe them:

Cautious, like someone crossing an icy stream;

Alert, like someone sensing danger;

Courteous, like a houseguest;

Yielding, like melting ice;

Undefined, like a piece of uncarved wood;

Open, like a valley;

Murky, like muddy water.

We must wait for the water to settle; then it will be clear.

Can you keep still until what is needed becomes clear?

Those who follow the Tao are not full of themselves.

They are like durable garments that need no renewal.

Fifteen

The ancient masters were subtle, mysterious, profound, responsive.

The depth of their knowledge is unfathomable.

Because it is unfathomable,

All we can do is describe their appearance.

Watchful, like men crossing a winter stream.

Alert, like men aware of danger.

Courteous, like visiting guests.

Yielding like ice about to melt.

Simple, like uncarved blocks of wood.

Hollow, like caves.

Opaque, like muddy pools.

Who can wait quietly while the mud settles?

Who can remain still until the moment of action?

Observers of the Tao do not seek fulfillment.

Not seeking fulfillment, they are not swayed by desire for change.

Those ancients who were well versed in the Tao

Were so subtle, mysterious and profound

As to escape understanding.

As they were beyond comprehension,

The description of them is surely perfunctory;

careful as if fording a river barefoot in winter;

vigilant and hesitant as if in fear of the attacks from neighbours;

formal as if they were guests;

polishedly flowing like melting ice;

simple and natural like the uncarved block;

vacant and deep like a valley;

turbid like muddy water;

quiet and calm like the great sea;

drifting as if they would never stop.

Who can end the muddiness

And make the muddy settle and gradually become clear?

Who can be at rest and yet, stirring, slowly come to life?

He who is in possession of this Tao

Will not seek completeness.

Just because he will not seek completeness,

He can be both old and new.

Of old a man who practiced Tao best

Had insight into the subtlest and penetrated into the darkest.

His depth was not to be plumbed.

Truly, because his depth was not to be plumbed,

He could be portrayed only arbitrarily:

Hesitant as if crossing a river in winter;

Cautious as if fearing all four sides;

Inviolable like a guest;

Loose like ice about to thaw;

Simple like the uncarved block;

Empty like a valley;

Murky like muddy water.

Who can be muddy and yet, keeping still, slowly turn clear?

Who can be calm and yet, keeping active, slowly come to life?

He who embraces this Tao

Never wishes to be full.

Truly, because he is never full,

He decays yet renews himself.

In antiquity, a person who followed the way of Dao,

Was as enigmatic as he was insightful.

He was also inscrutable.

Because of his inscrutability, I am compelled to describe his demeanour:

He acts cautiously, as if he were wading through a frigid stream in winter.

He conducts his affairs prudently, as if he were fearful of the gossiping of his nosy neighbours.

His behaviour is as majestic and proper as an honoured guest.

His demeanour is as spontaneous as the melting ice.

His character is as unsophisticated as a block of raw timber.

He is as open-minded as a valley.

He is as muddle-headed as a turbid stream.

Who can allow the turbid water to precipitate and gradually become clear?

Who can agitate the stillness and slowly bring vivacity back again?

He who follows the way of Dao does not become swollen-headed.

Consequently, he will endure.

Virtue Revealed

Hsien Teh

The good scholars of ancient times

Were keen, astute, mysterious, and intuitive.

They were so profound as to be incomprehensible.

Since they show themselves incomprehensible,

They must be depicted in some arbitrary way:

They were cautious as if fording a stream in winter,

Hesitant as if afraid of the neighbors around,

Dignified as if in the role of a guest;

They were easy-going, like ice about to melt,

Unpretentious, like wood in its virgin state,

Open-minded, like a valley,

And murky, like turbid water.

Who, being like turbid water, can remain calm,

So that quiescence will gradually lead to clarity?

Who can stay relaxed for a long while,

So that an impulse will gradually lead to Life?

He who conserves this Tao does not go to the limit.

For the reason that he does not go to the limit,

He can wear well and does not need renewal.

The Wise Men of old were skilled in the Mysteries; their minds were subtle and penetrating, and so profound that

they were scarcely to be understood.

Trying to understand them, this is the picture I call up:

They were cautious, like those who cross a river in winter;

They were reserved, like those who are suspicious of their fellows;

Their behaviour was modest and seemly, like that of one paying a formal visit;

They were yielding, like ice responding to the heat of the sun;

They were simple, like a piece of wood before it is carves;

Yet they were open to receive, like a valley between hills.

Yet they seem to some of us obscure, like a muddy strwam.

How shall water become clear cave by keeping stil?

It is by the still and the motionless that life is quickened.

Those who follow the Tao do not crave replenishment;

Always satisfied but never surfeited, they are ever-renewed.

The ancient masters were

Inwardly subtle and darkly perceptive.

Their depth was beyond understanding.

Because they were beyond understanding,

They can be described only by appearance:

Hesitant as if wading a river in winter,

Reluctant as if fearing a neighbor,

Reserved as if acting as guest,

Effacing like ice starting to melt,

Simple like uncarved wood,

Open like a valley,

Confused like muddy water.

Who else could clear muddy water

By quieting it?

Who else could move clear water

By bringing it to life?

Whoever keeps to Tao

Does not want to be full.

Not full, he can practice

Concealment instead of accomplishment.

The ancient ones who knew how to live with the subtle essence of the universe were gentle and flexible, profound and indistinguishable.

They were too deep to be known, thus we can only describe their appearance.

They did not rush into anything,

as if fording an icy stream in early winter.

They were retiring and hesitant, not assertive,

as if they were shy of people.

They were reverent in demeanor to everyone,

as if meeting honored guests.

They did not insist on imposing their views on others or interfering in worldly affairs,

as if they were passing travelers.

They adapted themselves to a circumstance like melting ice.

Simple and genuine, they were like virgin timber.

Empty and receptive, they were like a huge cave.

Comprehensive and unprejudiced,

they were equally kind to all things;

like the water of a stream flowing down a mountain, they benefitted all things.

Who else could move constantly from the gross and heavy to the light and pure?

Who else could evolve steadily from the inert and stagnant to everlasting life?

Those who hold fast to the subtle essence of the universe do not desire to extend themselves in climax.

Because there is no climax to one's extension and expansion, life is continually renewing itself.

XV.

Manifesting
Virtue

The
skillful masters of the olden time,

With
penetration subtle and profound,

Pursued
the mysteries of the abyss

To
depths which modern knowledge cannot sound;

And
as their labors were beyond our ken

I
will try to picture something of these men.

Cautious
they were, like one who comes to ford a wintry stream,

Irresolute,
like one who enters some strange neighborhood,

Reserved,
as one, a guest of some quite unknown host, would seem,

Changing,
like the melting ice before a summer s flood,

Simple
and unpretending as unseasoned blocks of wood,

Vacant,
like a valley, and like turbid water dim.

But
who can make the turbid water clear?

Leave
it to rest, the mud will disappear;

But
Who can make the turbid water rest?

Leave
it to move, and rest will soon be here.

They
who preserve the method of the Tao

Wish not
to fill themselves with their own self,

And,
empty of themselves, when growing old,

Are
never laid, old-fashioned, on the shelf.

Of old, those who were leaders in good actions examined mysteries with deep penetration; searching deeply, they did not understand; even Masters did not understand; therefore their actions were void of strength.

They were timid, as those who cross a torrent in winter; irresolute, as those who fear their neighbours; grave, as strangers before their host; they effaced themselves as ice that melts; they were rough as undressed wood, empty as a valley, confused as troubled water.

Who is able by quietness to make pure the troubled heart?

Who is able by repose to become conscious of Inner Life?

He who safely maintains his consciousness of Life will find it to be inexhaustible.

Therefore he will be able, though not faultless, to renew perfectness.

In
times past

the
Complete Thinkers of the Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

were
not obvious

about
what they did and

could
change to

meet
the circumstance,

Their
minds,

strong
and

widespread,

were
too deep to be measured.

Because
their minds

are
unmeasurable,

One
can only describe them

unclearly
by their appearance.

Slow
to start

like
one crossing thin ice;

Shy
as if surrounded by danger

on
all sides;

Careful
and polite like a guest;

Unbouded
like ice on the point of melting;

Genuine
like an

uncarved
block;

Hollow
like

a
cave;

Disordered
like

a
muddy pool;

And
yet who else could

quietly
and gradually

change
from the muddy to the clear?

Who
else could

slowly
but steadily

move
from the lifeless to the living?

The
who keep the Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

does
not want to be full.

But
precisely because they are never full,

They
can always

remain
open in thought,

They
do not become rigid in thought.

In olden times those skilful in the Way had wonderful subtlety and mysterious penetration, so profound that it is impossible to understand them. Since, indeed, it is impossible to understand them, one can only try to the best of one's ability to describe their appearance.

How hesitant, like one who wades a stream in winter!

How circumspect, like one who fears his neighbours on all sides!

How reserved, like one who is a guest!

How fluid, like ice about to melt!

How solid, like uncarved wood!

How wide, like a valley!

How turbid, like muddy water!

What may allay the muddiness? Through stillness it will gradually become clear.

What may make repose lasting? Through movement it will gradually ensue.

Those who observed this Way did not desire to be full. Indeed, because they were not full, they could wear out without renewal.

The skilful masters (of the Tao) in old times, with a subtle

and exquisite penetration, comprehended its mysteries, and were deep

(also) so as to elude men's knowledge. As they were thus beyond men's

knowledge, I will make an effort to describe of what sort they

appeared to be.

Shrinking
looked they like those who wade through a stream in

winter; irresolute like those who are afraid of all around them; grave

like a guest (in awe of his host); evanescent like ice that is melting

away; unpretentious like wood that has not been fashioned into

anything; vacant like a valley, and dull like muddy water.

Who
can (make) the muddy water (clear)? Let it be still, and it

will gradually become clear. Who can secure the condition of rest?

Let movement go on, and the condition of rest will gradually arise.

They
who preserve this method of the Tao do not wish to be full (of

themselves). It is through their not being full of themselves that

they can afford to seem worn and not appear new and complete.

The Ancient Masters like THOU
were subtle, profound, mysterious and
perceptive;
so deep they could not be 'identified.'
Now,
because they could not be 'identified,'
one can only describe them with difficulty;

hesitant, as though crossing a stream in winter;
careful, as though
conscious of every nearby stranger;
solemn, as though guests in someone else's
house;
self-diminishing, like ice melting away;
plain as an unhewn log;

intermingled-with like turbid waters;
as expansive and welcoming as
a broad valley.
If
turbid waters are stilled, they become clear.
If something still is set in
motion, it gradually becomes more 'lively.'
Those who perservered in this
Way did not wish to be over-full.
Now, simply by not wishing to to be over-full,

they could be like gossamer; hard to 'identify.'

Those
of old who knew the way

To origin and source within

Have seen the place where wholeness

And infinity begin

Alert
as one on a frozen stream

Or one who watches for the foe

Deferential as a guest

And generous as melting snow

Plain
as an uncarved block of wood

Expansive as a vale

Transparent just like water

Whose clarity will never fail

Can
you keep yourself so still

That muddy water clears?

And wait until right action

Spontaneously appears?

THE ancient adepts of the Tao were subtle and flexible, profound and comprehensive.

Their minds were too deep to be fathomed.

Because they are unfathomable,

One can only describe them vaguely by their appearance.

Hesitant like one wading a stream in winter;

Timid like one afraid of his neighbours on all sides;

Cautious and courteous like a guest;

Yielding like ice on the point of melting;

Simple like an uncarved block;

Hollow like a cave;

Confused like a muddy pool;

And yet who else could quietly and gradually evolve from the muddy to the clear?

Who else could slowly but steadily move from the inert to the living?

He who keeps the Tao does not want to be full.

But precisely because he is never full,

He can always remain like a hidden sprout,

And does not rush to early ripening.

The ancient masters of the Tao

had a subtle, perceptive, penetration.

Their wisdom was unfathomable and cannot be comprehended.

It is because they were unknowable that we can only describe the way they appeared.

They were as careful as someone crossing an iced-over stream,

They were as aware as a warrior in hostile territory.

They were as considerate and humble as a guest,

as changeable as melting ice.

They were as unpretentious as an un-carved block of wood,

and as approachable as a wide open valley.

They were as clear as a glass of water.

Do you have the patience to wait...

till the mud settles and your water is clear?

Can you remain motionless...

till the right action arises by itself?

The Master doesn't seek fulfillment.

Not seeking, not expecting,

He is at hand in every moment,

His vigor will not be easily exhausted,

And his need for renewal will be reduced.

The Sages of old were profound

and knew the ways of subtlety and discernment.

Their wisdom is beyond our comprehension.

Because their knowledge was so far superior

I can only give a poor description.

They
were careful

as someone crossing an frozen stream in winter.

Alert as if surrounded on all sides by the enemy.

Courteous as a guest.

Fluid as melting ice.

Whole as an uncarved block of wood.

Receptive as a valley.

Turbid as muddied water.

Who
can be still

until their mud settles

and the water is cleared by itself?

Can you remain tranquil until right action occurs by itself?

The
Master doesn't seek fulfillment.

For only those who are not full are able to be used

which brings the feeling of completeness.

[The Leader's Teachers] practiced meditation. Meditation made them good at seeing how things happen. Meditation grounded them in the infinite. That is why they sometimes appeared deep and inscrutable, sometimes even great.

Their leadership did not rest on technique or on theatrics, but on silence and on their ability to pay attention.

They moved with grace and awareness, and they were able to negotiate complex situations safely.

They were considerate. They did no injury. They were courteous and quiet, like guests. They knew how to yield gracefully and how to be natural and inconspicuous.

They were as open and receptive and available as the valleys that lie among the hills.

They could clarify events for others, because they had done it for themselves. They could speak to the depths of another person, because they had known their own deeper conflicts and blocks.

Because they had given up selfishness, they could enhance others.

They were not trying to become enlightened, because they were enlightened.

The Sages of old were scholars who knew well

The way of subtlety, mystery and discernment.

Their wisdom was beyond comprehension.

Because they were beyond comprehension,

I can only describe their appearance:

They were cautious, as if crossing a river in winter.

They were hesitant,

as if fearing danger from All sides, They were polite, as if they were

guests.

They were always growing,

like the puddle from a melting cube of ice.

They were genuine, like an uncarved block of wood.

They were as open-minded as a valley.

They were open to infinite possibilities, like a turbulent storm.

Who can wait for the storm to stop,

To find peace in the calm that follows?

The person who is able to wait patiently in this peace

will eventually know what is right.

Those who respect the Tao do not go to extremes.

Not going to extremes, they are inconspicuous and content.

Those
who live in oneness manifest the Infinite

in simple ways.

Their
awareness is the awareness of Infinity.

Their knowing cannot be described but only

experienced.

All that can be described is their acts and their

appearance and the perception of them.

They
are;

alert when crossing unfamiliar space,

cautious in hostile lands,

humble as a guest,

indifferently transforming as melting ice,

possessing the infinite potential of

an unremarkable piece of uncarved

wood,

mysterious as an unexplored valley,

perplexing as muddy water.

Can
you see the calm in turbulent waters;

the clarity in murky water?

Can
you allow the tides of Infinite change

to move you from stillness to motion

and action to inaction;

experiencing but not contemplating the

change?

Those
who live in oneness do not seek

fullness because at every moment they

are aware of their infinite fullness and

the infinite pregnancy of all things.

They
are aware of their infinite potential

within which the limitations of fullness

resides.

In the beginning, those who worked the land

were modest and charming, with profound understanding.

Their depth was not easy to recognize.

And if not easy to recognize,

perhaps it is better just to describe their appearance.

They were crossing a river in Winter, so it seemed.

Respectful of their four neighbors. Solemn in appearance.

They always seemed thankful, as if pardoned just yesterday.

Their simple honesty was sincere, and broad as a valley.

Without a purpose, they appeared dull.

He who can be dull, has a quiet serenity.

He who is at peace, can withstand a lifetime of hard work.

He who keeps this Way can not ask for more;

and not asking for more, need not hide his achievements.

In ancient times masters of the Tao were possessed of a subtle mystery and a penetrating perception;

Too profound to be understood.

Because they were too profound to be understood,

All we can do is describe their outward appearance:

Cautious, like one crossing a river in winter;

Hesitant, like one who fears his neighbours;

Reserved, like one who is a guest;

Yielding, like ice that is melting;

Simple, like an uncarved block;

Open, like a wide valley;

Obscure, like muddy water.

Who can make muddy water clear by keeping still?

Who can, from rest, gradually stir to life?1

Those who hold fast to the Tao

Have no desire to be filled.

Having no desire to be filled

They can endure all wear yet never need to be renewed.

1. These two lines may allude to a meditation technique (cf. LaFarge 1994, 357).

The ancient wise ones seemed unattainably profound.

Since they were such, I can describe them only this way:

Hesitant as if they were crossing a winter river;

Inhibited as if they were afraid of their neighbors;

Undisciplined like melting ice on flowing water;

Simple-minded like a piece of rough plank;

Void like a vast-spreading empty valley;

And unenlightened like a muddled pool.

If anyone keeps the muddled state still,

It will gradually clear up.

If anyone keeps it still for long,

There will gradually be new production.

One who keeps this Way will not try to become filled.

Keeping unfilled, one is always ready for new successes.

The Excellent shih of ancient times penetrated into the most obscure, the marvelous, the mysterious. They had a depth beyond understanding.

They were simply beyond understanding. The Appearance of their forceful presence: Cautious, like one crossing a stream in winter timid, like one who fears the surrounding neighbours reserved, like guests

yielding, like ice about to melt unspecified, like the Uncarved Block all vacant space, like the Valley everything mixed together, like muddy water.

Who is able, as muddy water, by Stilling to slowly become clear? Who is able, at rest, by long drawn-out movement to slowly come to life?

Whoever holds onto this Tao does not yearn for solidity. He simply lacks solidity, and so what he is capable of: Remaining concealed, accomplishing nothing new.

Since ancient time, those capable of spiritual Enlightenment cognized hidden and hardly cognizable small and large steps of this Path.

Such seekers were hard to recognize. Let me just outline their appearance: they were cautious like man crossing a river in winter; they were circumspect, because they bewared strangers; they were alert, because they knew that one's time of staying on the Earth is limited; they were watchful as if they walked melting ice; they were simple; they were vast like a dale; they were unreachable for idle looks.

They were those who in calm could transform the dirty into pure.

They were those who contributed to the evolution of Life.

They worshipped Tao and were satisfied with little in the world of matter. Not desiring much, they were satisfied with what they had and did not seek for more.

In the past, those followers of the Tao Way,

Were very deep in spirit, not easy to be understood.

Such a Wise Person was so cautious

Like a man crossing a river in the wintertime.

He was so slow in taking decisions

Like one afraid of being misunderstood.

He was so humble, like one who doesn't deserve anything.

He didn't interfere with anyone's movement

Like a piece of ice on a slippery surface.

He was so simple and natural

Like a piece of wood from a forest.

He was ready to receive like a wide valley.

Friendly like mixing waters.

That
who found himself in dirty waters,

Should let them to become clean.

That who is unsettled, unable to stay still

Should slow down all the actions.

Those on the Tao Way avoid taking action,

Thus their potential always remains high.

Those
of old who were good at being knight-scholars were subtle, were possessed of
ineffable efficacy, and were in dark and mysterious confluence, so profound
that they could not be perceived. Only because they cannot be perceived do I
give them a forced description. Cautious as though crossing a [frozen] stream
in wintertime, apprehensive as though in fear of people on all four sides, deferential
like a guest. Riven like ice on the verge of melting. Wholesome like the Uncarved
Block. Accepting like a valley. Turbid as though having been muddled. Who can
be muddled in order to gradually become clear? Who can be tranquil in order
that activity will gradually stir? Those who are protected in this Dao will
not desire fullness. For only by not being full is one able to be tattered and
yet newly complete.

The Ancients who made themselves the best

Were subtle and penetrating

And deep beyond knowing.

Because they were beyond knowing,

we can only try to describe them:

Cautious, as if crossing the river in winter.

Circumspect, as if afraid of the neighbors on four sides.

Dignified, as if a guest.

Expansive, as melting ice.

Unspoiled, as unhewn wood.

Broad, as a valley.

Opaque, as turbid puddles.

Who can calm the turbid and clear it gradually?

Who can stir the inert and bring it gradually to life?

One who keeps this Tao does not wish to be filled.

And because he is not filled,

he can be sheltered and beyond renewal.

The Power in Subtle Force

Those skillful in teh ancient Tao

Are subtly ingenious and profoundly intuitive.

They are so deep they cannot be recognized.

Since, indeed, they cannot be recognized,

Their force can be contained.

So careful!

As if wading a stream in winter.

So hesitant!

As if respecting all sides in the community.

So reserved!

As if acting as a guest.

So yielding!

As if ice about to melt.

So candid!

As if acting wiht simplicity.

So open!

As if acting as a valley.

So integrated!

As if acting as muddy water.

Who can harmonize with muddy water,

And gradually arrive at clarity?

Who can move with stability,

And gradually bring endurance to life?

Those who maintain the Tao

Do not desire to become full.

Indeed, since they are not full,

They can be used up and also renewed.

Like our ancient masters, do not seek, do not expect. Stir up the lakebed and watch it settle. Pour water into your teacup, but do not overfill. Enjoy a flower the same in a battlefield just as on a rivers edge. Be like nature and do not judge good from bad. Accept an honorable guest the same as a criminal.

The excellent masters of old,

Subtle, mysterious, mystic, acute,

Were much too profound for their times.

Since they were not then understood,

It is better to tell how they looked.

Like
men crossing streams in the winter,

How
cautious!

As if all around there were danger,

How
watchful!

As if they were guests on every occasion,

How
dignified!

Like ice just beginning to melt,

Self-effacing!

Like a wood-block untouched by a tool,

How
sincere!

Like a valley awaiting a guest,

How
receptive!

Like a torrent that rushes along,

And
so turbid!

Who,
running dirty, comes clean like still waters?

Who, being quiet, moves others to fullness of life?

It is he who, embracing the Way, is not greedy;

Who endures wear and tear without needing renewal.

The shi (Knower of Tao) in the old times is subtle, profound and generous, too deep to be understood by the common people.

As he is thus beyond people's knowledge,

I can only describe him arbitrarily.

(He is) cautious beforehand, like wading into a river in winter.

(He is) considering repeatedly, like one vigilant when threatened by neighbouring states' attack.

(He is) grave and reverent, like a visiting guest.

(He is) supple and pliant, like ice which is about to melt.

(He is) genuine and plain, like an uncarved block.

(He is) open and broad, like a quiet valley.

(He is) all-embracing, like a great muddy river.

Who can make the muddy water clear?

As it quiets down it will become clear.

Who can make stillness last?

It will gradually lose the peace as change arises.

He who preserves this Tao does not wish for overflowing.

It is precisely because there is no overflowing that he is able to succeed continually,

Though he looks conservative.

In antiquity, he who was good at being a leader was perfectly in step with mystery in all its subtlety and profundity; so recondite was he that it was impossible to understand him.

Now, because he defies understanding, all I can do is force a description of what he was like: he seemed hesitant, as one might be when fording a river in winter.

He seemed tentative, as one who fears his neighbors on all four sides.

He seemed solemn, oh, as if he were the guest.

He seemed yielding, oh, just like ice when about to break up.

He seemed solid and sturdy, oh, just like an uncarved block of wood.

He seemed empty and receptive, oh, just like a valley.

He seemed amorphous, oh, just like murky water.

Who can take his turbidity and, by stilling it, gradually become clear?

Who can take his quietude and, by stirring it long, gradually come alive?

One who keeps this Dao does not wish to be filled.

For it is only by not getting filled that one can avoid having the cover remade.

1. The one who was skilled at practicing the Way in antiquity,

2. Was subtle and profound, mysterious and penetratingly wise.

3. His depth cannot be known.

4. It is only because he cannot be known

5. That therefore were I forced to describe him I'd say:

6.
Hesitant was he! Like someone crossing a river in winter.

7. Undecided was he! As though in fear of his neighbors on all four sides.

8. Solemn and polite was he! Like a guest.

9. Scattered and dispersed was he! Like an ice as it melts

10. Genuine, unformed was he! Like uncarved wood.

11. Merged, undifferentiated was he! Like muddy water.

12. Broad and expansive was he! Like a valley.

13.
If you take muddy water and still it, it gradually becomes clear.

14. If you bring something to rest in order to move it, it gradually comes alive.

15. The one who preserved this Way does not desire to be full;

16. Therefore he can wear out with no need to be renewed.

The ancient
Masters were pretty damn impressive.

They were deep. Real deep.

Words can't even begin to describe how deep they were.

You can only talk about what they were like.

They were careful,
like a man walking on thin ice.

They were cautious, like a soldier behind enemy lines.

They were polite, like a guest at a party.

They moved quickly, like melting ice.

They were as plain as a block of wood.

Their minds were as wide as a valley,

and their hearts were as clear as spring water.

Can you wait
for that kind of openness and clarity

before you try to understand the world?

Can you stay still until events have unfolded

before you do the right thing?

When you act
without expectations,

you can accomplish great things.

.

The Wise

The wise have ancient mystic wisdom

and profound understanding, too deep to comprehend.

Because they can not be comprehended,

they can only be described by analogy:

cautious, like crossing a stream in winter;

alert, like one aware of danger on all sides;

courteous, like a visiting guest;

self-effacing, like ice beginning to melt;

genuine, like a piece of uncarved wood;

open and receptive, like a valley;

freely mixing, like muddy water.

Who can make sense of a muddy world?

Let it be still, and it becomes clear.

Who can remain calm,

and through activity come back to life?

Those who embrace this Way do not over-extend themselves.

Because they do not over-extend themselves,

they do not wear out and are not replaced.

The wise men of old were masters of meditation and one with the One.

Unfathomable was their depth incomprehensible their greatness.

Without attracting attention they acted out of their stillness.

They walked cautiously as though wading through a swollen river.

They were watchful as though it were important not to hurt anyone

reserved like guests from foreign lands

Yielding like snow in the sun

Inconspicuous like uncut wood

Willing and open like a deep valley

And yet obscure and inscrutable like troubled waters ....

Who can clear muddiness and lighten up darkness?

One who in the stillness and the silence clears and illumines itself.

And who can quicken the dregs without stirring them?

The Tao-united man who has emptied himself by letting-go.

Because he has become selfless he bestows life.

He no longer awaits the coming of fullness who has attained perfection.

Tao-practician's Manner

Lao Tze says,

The Tao-practitioners of old times had subtle wisdom and depth of understanding, and could comprehend the will of Heaven.

They were so profound that they could not be understood:

I will make an effort to describe what sort of men they appeared to be.

Cautiously observed, they were like those in enemy territory;

dignified like a guest;

self-effacing like ice that is melting away;

unpretentious like a piece of undressed wood;

open-minded like a valley;

and mixing freely like turbulent water.

Who can make the turbulent water still and let it gradually become clear?

Who can settle down the perpetual movement and let the condition of rehabilitation gradually arise?

They are those who preserve this Tao guard against overdoing.

It is through guarding against overdoing that their previous possessions are not lost, and they will again procure newness.

THE MANIFESTATION OF THE TAO IN MAN

The
sage of old was profound and wise;

like a man at a ford, he took great care,

alert, perceptive and aware.

Desiring
nothing for himself,

and having no desire

for change for its own sake,

his actions were difficult to understand.

Being
watchful, he had no fear of danger;

being responsive, he had no need of fear.

He
was courteous like a visiting guest,

and as yielding as the springtime ice.

Having no desires, he was untouched by craving.

Receptive
and mysterious,

his knowledge was unfathomable,

causing others to think him hesitant.

Pure
in heart, like uncut jade,

he cleared the muddy water

by leaving it alone.

By
remaining calm and active,

the need for renewing is reduced.

The ancient Masters were profound and subtle.

Their wisdom was unfathomable.

There is no way to describe it;

all we can describe is their appearance.

They were careful

as someone crossing an iced-over stream.

Alert as a warrior in enemy territory.

Courteous as a guest.

Fluid as melting ice.

Shapable as a block of wood.

Receptive as a valley.

Clear as a glass of water.

Do you have the patience to wait

till your mud settles and the water is clear?

Can you remain unmoving

till the right action arises by itself?

The Master doesn't seek fulfillment.

Not seeking, not expecting,

she is present, and can welcome all things.

The ancient scholar knew how to be perfect:

keep himself subtle, wonderful, profound and flexible.

He kept his mind so deep that it could not be fathomed!

Because it could not be fathomed, it could only be described superficially:

Hesitatingly, like one who is crossing a stream in winter;

Timidly, like one who is new to his surrounding neighbors;

Reservedly, like a new guest;

Yieldingly, like ice which is melting;

Honest, like Pure Matter;

Obscure, like muddy water;

and Capacious, like a deep valley.

Who can calmly make the muddy (chaotic) clear (orderly)?

Who can calmly change the static (matter) into dynamic (force)?

To return to Dao is to let the capacity of mind not be over-filled.

Only the mind which is not over-filled can renew the old and perfect the new.

The ancient sages of Tao are subtle and mysteriously penetrating.

Their depth is beyond the power of will.

Because it is beyond the power of will,

The most we can do is describe it:

Thus, full of care, as one crossing the wintry stream,

Attentive, as one cautious of the total environment,

Reserved, as one who is a guest,

Spread open, as when confronting a marsh,

Simple, like uncarved wood,

Opaque, like mud,

Magnificent, like a valley.

From within the murky comes the stillness.

The feminine enlivens with her milk.

Keeping such a Tao, excess is undesirable.

Desiring no excess, work is completed without exhaustion.

XV

Those
ancient masters who once walked the way

Were subtle, wise, profound, penetrating

Unfathomable; they can only be described, not known

They
were cautious, as though wading a winter-swollen river

Hesitant as though fearing to offend

Moderate as a guest

Difficult to grasp as melting ice

Supple in mind and body as a green branch

Fertile as a valley

Opaque as muddy water

If
you take muddy water and still it, it gradually becomes clear

Let it come to rest, and it gradually comes alive

Hold to this way, nurture that hidden life

And you will never desire to be finished

And thus will never wear yourself out

Skilled Warriors of Old

Skilled warriors of old were subtle,

mysteriously powerful,

so deep they were unknowable.

just because they are unknowable,

I will try to describe them.

Their wariness was as that of one crossing a river in winter,

their caution was as that of one in fear of all around;

their gravity was as that of a guest,

their relaxation was as that of ice at the melting point.

Simple as uncarved wood,

open as the valleys,

they were inscrutable as murky water.

Who can, in turbidity,

use the gradual clarification of stillness?

Who can, long at rest,

use the gradual enlivening of movement?

Those who preserve this Way do not want fullness.

Just because of not wanting fullness,

it is possible to use to the full and not make anew.

In history, those who mastered Tao are extremely knowledgeable with profound expertise.

Hence they are hard to describe.

Because of this, I can only roughly portray them as follows:

Being prudent as if walking across the thin ice of the river,

Being alert as if being surrounded with the danger,

Being dignified like a guest,

Being relaxed as if thawing,

Being sincere and natural like uncarved wood,

Being open-hearted like valley,

Being approachable like the earth,

Being broad like ocean,

Being active like wind blowing.

Can the murkiness be clarified slowly?

Can a halt start to move gradually?

Those who know Tao would never be complacent.

It is because of this they can be refreshing, creative, and innovative.

In ancient times the wise men of the Way were subtle, divine, comprehensive and too profound to be known.

Because they are unfathomable, we try to describe their picture as following:

Hesitant like one crossing a stream in winter.

Timid like one afraid of his neighbors on all sides.

Serious like a guest.

Thawing like ice on the point of melting.

Simple like an uncarved block.

Hollow like a cave.

Muddled like muddy water.

Who knows he is muddled and settles down, then quietly and gradually becomes clear?

Who knows to move from inertia and gradually become living?

He who keeps the Way does not want to be full.

Precisely because he is never full, he can always remain hidden, and does not become new.

The ancient masters knew, the subtle, the mysterious, the profound, the all
encompass as:

The unfathomable.

For being unfathomable, only the appearance can be described.

Hesitatingly, as crossing a winter stream.

Watchfully, as aware of danger.

Seriously, as attending a summit meeting.

Yielding, like ice about to melt.

Simple, like pooh (see note)

Hollow, like caves.

Mixed, as opaque.

Quietly waiting until opaque becomes clear.

Remain still until the moment of action.

Who cultivates this Tao will not over flow (or ejaculate).

Because of not over flowing, he can shed old and generate new.

The ancient followers of the Tao

were subtle, mysterious, and penetrating.

They were too deep to be fathomed.

All we can do is describe their appearance.

Hesitant, as if crossing a winter stream.

Watchful, as if aware of neighbors on all sides.

Respectful, like a visiting guest.

Yielding, like ice beginning to melt.

Simple, like an uncarved block.

Open, like a valley.

Obscure, like muddy water.

Who
else can be still and let the muddy water

slowly become clear?

Who else can remain at rest and slowly come to life?

Those
who hold fast to the Tao

do not try to fill themselves to the brim.

Because thev do not try to be full

they can be worn out and yet ever new.

Wise
people

are so very subtle, deep, penetrating and mysterious

that they are

too profound to be understood.

Because they cannot be understood

one can only try to describe them.

They are

cautious, like a cat entering a strange house

alert, like a person walking through a strange city at midnight

reserved, like an invited guest

yielding, like lake ice in the spring

simple, like a block of wood

spacious, like night on the plains

obscure, like a muddied stream.

Can
you wait quietly

or the muddy to become clear?

Can you calm yourself

in order to later become active?

Following
the path of natural atheism

one has no desire for heaven or to believe.

When a person is not swayed by desire or belief,

one is able to remain one with the universe

without changing.

The best rulers of old had fine natures, mysterious, too deep, they could not
be understood.

And because such men could not be fully grasped at once,

they appeared to be

cautious, like wading a stream in winter;

at a loss, like one fearing and having to deal with danger on every side;

reserved, like one who pays a visit;

pliant and yielding, as ice when it begins to melt;

genuine, like a piece of raw wood;

open-minded like a valley;

and blending freely like a troubled, muddy stream of water.

Find
repose in a muddy world by lying still; be gradually clear through tranquillity.
You can assume such murkiness, to become in the end still and clear. And maintain
your calm long in between.

So make yourself inert, to get in the end full of life and stir.

By such activity come back to life.

Who
hugs this dao doesn't want to fill himself to overflowing.

It's just because he guards against being over-full, there's no overflowing,
and next

he is like a garment that endures all, beyond wearing out and renewal.

Those of old who were adept in the Way were subtly profound and mysteriously perceptive,

So deep they could not be recognized.

Now,

Because they could not be recognized,

One can describe their appearance only with effort:

hesitant, as though crossing a stream in winter;

cautious, as though fearful of their neighbors all around;

solemn, as though guests in someone else's house;

shrinking, as ice when it melts;

plain, as an unhewn log;

muddled, as turbid waters;

expansive, as a broad valley.

If turbid waters are stilled,

they will gradually become clear;

If something inert is set in motion,

it will gradually come to life.

Those who preserved this Way did not wish to be full.

Now,

Simply because they did not wish to be full, they could be threadbare and incomplete.

The ancient wise men were skilful in their mysterious acquaintance with profundities.

They were fathomless in their depths; so profound, that I cannot bring them forth to my mind.

They were cautious, like one who crosses a swollen river.

They were reserved, like one who doubts his fellows.

They were watchful, like one who travels abroad.

They were retiring, like snow beneath the sun.

They were simple, like newly felled timber.

They were lowly, like the valley.

They were obscure, like muddy water.

May not a man take muddy water and make it clear by keeping still?

May not a man take a dead thing and make it alive by continuous motion?

Those who follow this Tao have no need of replenishing, and being devoid of all properties, they grow old without need of being filled.

Within You

Within you is a place of love and grace.

It is a place without fear

where there is no need to defend or prove,

no need to lie or hide.

From this place spring words of truth,

actions of courage,

and a life of love.

Wait patiently for the voices of fear in your mind

to cease their frantic call to action.

Become aware of what the next clear step

of love might be.

Be patient with yourself.

The qualities of a lover

do not depend on externals.

They take root in your own soul

and grow as you attend to them.

They all lie within you.

Of old those who were the best rulers were subtly mysterious and profoundly penetrating; Too deep to comprehend.

And because they cannot be comprehended, I can only describe them
arbitrarily: Cautious, like crossing a frozen stream in the winter,
Being at a loss, like one fearing danger on all sides, Reserved, like
one visiting,

Supple and pliant, like ice about to melt. Genuine, like a piece of
uncarved wood, Open and broad, like a valley, Merged and
undifferentiated, like muddy water.

Who can make muddy water gradually clear through tranquillity? Who can
make the still gradually come to life through activity?

He who embraces this Tao does not want to fill himself to overflowing.
It is precisely because there is no overflowing that he is beyond
wearing out and renewal.

Long ago the
land was ruled with a wisdom

Too fine, too deep, to be fully understood

And, since it was beyond men's full understanding,

Only some of it has come down to us, as in these sayings:

'Alert as a winter-farer on an icy stream,'

'Wary as a man in ambush,'

'Considerate as a welcome guest,'

'Selfless as melting ice,'

'Green as an uncut tree,

'Open as a valley,'

And this one also, 'Roiled as a torrent,

Why roiled as a torrent?

Because when a man is in turmoil how shall he find peace

Save by staying patient till the stream clears?

How can a man's life keep its course

If he will not let it flow?

Those who flow as life flows know

They need no other force:

They feel no wear, they feel no tear,

They need no mending, no repair.

People in the past who practiced the DAO understood the real essence of the world so deeply that the ordinary people could not appreciate them.

Because these people cannot be appreciated and understood,

I will try to give you a rough sketch of them.

They acted very cautiously, like walking on thin ice.

They behaved very carefully, like being watched by everybody.

They looked very dignified, like going to a banquet.

They were very warm and kind, like being able to melt ice.

They were very plain, like a block of uncarved wood.

They had a very big heart, like a deep valley.

They were very tolerant, like a flooding river that contains everything.

Who can get clear water from mud by letting the mud settle slowly?

Who can create new things gradually from stillness by taking the initiative?

These people who kept the DAO were never conceited.

Only because they were not conceited,

Were they able to create the future while preserving the past.

The embodiment of the Tao Eternal,

The ancient masters are wondrously subtle and profoundly penetrating.

The depth of their being is unfathomable and beyond comprehension.

As their depth is unfathomable and beyond comprehension,

Only their appearance can be incompletely described:

The master is as alert as a person fording a winter stream,

As careful as a person watchful of his surroundings,

As respectful as a thoughtful guest,

As flowing as melting ice,

As plain as an unhewn log,

As empty as an open valley,

As inclusive as turbid waters.

Who could keep still until turbid waters become clear of their own accord?

Who could stay calm until still waters become alive of their own accord?

Those who embody the Tao do not desire to extend themselves to the fullest.

For, the Tao is balance,

and there is no fullest, no extreme.

Therefore, through balance, they refill their essence and renew their life force forevermore.

The ancient wise ones seemed unattainably profound.

Since they were such, I can describe them only this way:

Hesitant as if they were crossing a winter river;

Inhibited as if they were afraid of their neighbors;

Undisciplined like melting ice on flowing water;

Simple-minded like a piece of rough plank;

Void like a vast-spreading empty valley;

And unenlightened like a muddled pool.

If anyone keeps the muddled state still,

It will gradually clear up.

If anyone keeps it still for long,

There will gradually be new production.

One who keeps this Way will not try to become filled.

Keeping unfilled, one is always ready for new successes.

The ancient masters of the Tao

had a subtle, perceptive, penetration.

Their wisdom was unfathomable and cannot be comprehended.

It is because they were unknowable that we can only describe the way they appeared.

They were as careful as someone crossing an iced-over stream,

They were as aware as a warrior in hostile territory.

They were as considerate and humble as a guest,

as changeable as melting ice.

They were as unpretentious as an un-carved block of wood,

and as approachable as a wide open valley.

They were as clear as a glass of water.

Do you have the patience to wait...

till the mud settles and your water is clear?

Can you remain motionless...

till the right action arises by itself?

The Master doesn't seek fulfillment.

Not seeking, not expecting,

He is at hand in every moment,

His vigor will not be easily exhausted,

And his need for renewal will be reduced.

