===== Chapter 73 =====

The fearless in daring are necessarily killed.

The fearless in not-daring necessarily survive.

Those who are of these two [types]:

Some are benefited.

Some are harmed.

That which is detested by Heaven—who knows the reason?

The Tao of Heaven does not struggle but is good at winning.

Does not speak but is good at responding.

Is not summoned but returns of itself.

Is simple like this but is good at planning.

Heaven's net is immensely vast.

Lax.

But nothing slips through.

Courage to dare kills, Courage not to dare saves. One brings profit, one brings harm.

Of these two, one is good, and one is harmful. Some are not favored by
heaven. Who knows why? Even the wise consider it a difficult question.

Heaven hates what it hates - Who knows why! Even the Sage finds it
difficult. Heaven's Tao does not contend But prevails, Does not speak,
But responds, Is not summoned, But arrives, Is utterly still, But plans
all actions.

Heaven's net is wide, wide, Loose - But nothing slips through.

The one whose courage comes from being fearless

Gets killed.

The one whose courage comes from being fearful

Stays alive.

Both kinds of bravery lead to benefit or harm.

If one of them heaven detests who knows the reason why?

Even the sage is unable to explain this.

The Tao of heaven excels at overcoming without competing,

At responding without speaking,

At drawing to itself without beckoning,

At laying plans without hurrying.

Heaven's weapons are crude, its targets strewn wide

Yet when it takes aim it won't miss the mark.

COURAGE

That courage which is manifest by bravado and foolhardiness,

Leads to disaster and death.

That which is not so manifest,

Leads to life.

Be tween these two,

One benefits - one does not.

Even the Sage has difficulty in knowing why one of these brings destruction from above.

It is the way of nature -

- Not to compete, yet to achieve victory.

- Not to ask, yet to obtain an answer.

- Not to summon, yet be supplied all needs.

- Not to overtly plan, yet to achieve results.

Truly - the net of nature is cast far and wide.

Tho' its mesh be coarse,

Yet nothing escapes.

Being rash in your courage is like killing.

Not being rash in your courage supports life.

Of these two, one supports Heaven, the other does not.

People who are in an ugly-hearted place, what do they know?

The sages are correct to watch for this difficulty.Heaven's Tao:

- does not compete and excels at overcoming.

- does not use words and has good answers.

- does not summon yet spontaneously attracts.

- has a patient manner, yet is good at laying plans.

Heaven's net is vast, wide, and open, and nothing is lost.

ESTABLISHING THE LAW OF FREEDOM

One man, daring, is executed; another, not daring, liveth. It would seem

as if the one course were profitable and the other detrimental. Yet when

Heaven smiteth a man, who shall assign the cause thereof? Therefore the

sage is diffident.

The
Tao of Heaven contendeth not, yet it overcometh; it is silent, yet

its need is answered; it summoneth none, but all men come to it of their

free will. Its method is quietness, yet its will is efficient. Large

are the meshes of Heaven's Net; wide open, yet letting none escape.

He whose boldness appears in his daring (to do wrong, in defiance ofthe laws) is put to death; he whose boldness appears in this not daring(to do so) lives on. Of these two cases the one appears to be advantageous,and the other to be injurious. but

When Heaven's anger smites a man, Who the cause shall truly scan?

On this account the sage feels a difficulty (as to what to do in theformer case). It is the way of Heaven not to strive, and yet it skillfullyovercomes; not to speak, and yet it is skilful in (obtaining) a reply,does not call, and yet men come to it of themselves. Its demonstrationsare quiet, and yet its plans are skilful and effective. The meshes of thenet of Heaven are large; far apart, but letting nothing escape.

Having guts and being reckless will lead to death

Having guts and being cautious saves life

The first is useless; the other useful

Only one who is wise understands the course of things

Therefore he won't intervene

It is easy to infringe upon the eternal laws of nature

But they always triumph

They don't speak, yet they do answer

They don't yell, yet everybody hears them

Like a net, the original order protects the Universe

Though its meshes seem wide, nothing can come through

He whose courage expresses itself as defiance is often put to death. He whose courage manifests itself as patience to endure insult continues to live.

Of these two kinds of courage, the one is beneficial, the other harmful. Many people are puzzled as to why, of two courageous men, one is harmed and one benefited. But the intelligent man finds no difficulty with this question.

Nature itself has the patience to endure insult, yet always wins in the end. It does not explain; nevertheless all understand. It does not command; but all eventually obey. It does not hurry; yet everything is accomplished.

Nature's web is so finely woven - wide enough to catch the biggest, fine enough to catch the smallest - that not a single thing escapes.

He whose braveness lies in daring, slays.

He whose braveness lies in not daring , gives life.

Of these two, either may be profitable or unprofitable.

But "Heaven hates what it hates;

None can know the reason why".

Wherefore the Sage, too, disallows it.

For it is the way of Heaven not to strive but none the less to conquer,

Not to speak, but none the less to get an answer,

Not to beckon; yet things come to it of themselves.

Heaven is like one who says little, yet none the less has laid his plans.

Heaven's net is wide;

Coarse are the meshes, yet nothing slips through.

A courageous and reckless man will kill or be killed.

A courageous and careful man preserves life.

Of the two, which is beneficial and which brings harm?

Who knows what heaven favors.

Even the sage is unsure.

The way of heaven does not contend, yet overcomes.

Does not speak, yet converses.

Without being summoned it comes of its own,

unhurried, and according to plan.

The net of heaven is vast.

Though the mesh is wide, nothing slips through.

Courage atop presumption suggests dying

Courage in avoiding presumption suggests survival

(Yet) either of these may be sometimes beneficial,

other times harmful

That which heaven holds in contempt -

Who knows as to the reasons?

This is why wise ones watch for things to get complicated

Heaven's way does not compete, yet skillfully overcomes

Does not speak, yet skillfully replies

Does not summon, yet naturally attracts

Is above all of this, yet skillfully arranges

Heaven's net is vast & encompassing

Loosely meshed, and yet nothing escapes

Fate

If you are brave in being daring, You will be killed.

If you are brave in not being daring, you will preserve life.

With these two things, in one case there is profit,

In the other there is harm.

The things that Heaven hates - Who knows why?

The Tao of Heaven is not to fight

And yet to be good at winning -

Not to speak, and yet to respond with skills -

Not to summon it, yet to let it come on its own -

To be at ease and yet to plan with care.

the Even age is unsure of this.

Heaven's net casts wide.

Though its meshes are course,

nothing slips through.

Those who are courageous out of daring are killed. Those who are courageous out of love survive.

The first is harmful, the second beneficial. Heaven prohibits some things, but who knows the reason? Not even the sage knows the answer to this.

This is the way of heaven: It doesn't contend, but easily overcomes. It doesn't speak, but always responds. It can't be summoned, but comes of its own volition. Utterly without haste, it plans for everything.

The net of heaven is vast. Though its meshes are wide, nothing slips through.

The wooden impetuosity of the hero

Is the path of inner death.

Courage that retreats from daring

Is the path of inner life.

Yet one who walks on either road

Will sometimes suffer, sometimes prosper-

As if God indeed played dice,

While humans fought to find His Reason.

The Cosmic Consciousness does not compete,

And thus it simply finds its way.

It doesn't have to talk or make its point,

And thus it can communicate.

It does not send an invitation,

It so naturally attracts all being.

It does not micromanage,

And all its parts harmonize.

The Cosmic Whole is like a net-

So perfectly cast, its open meshes are capable

Of catching everything.

One of courage, with audacity, will kill.

One of courage, but gentle, spares life.

From these two kinds of courage

arise harm and benefit.

Even
if Tao dislikes certain people,

who can say why?

The truly wise regard this

as a most difficult question.

Tao
does not contend but it surely wins,

does not speak but it surely responds,

does not command but things come of themselves.

It is empty yet contains the master plan.

The
net of Tao is all-encompassing,

its meshes are wide, yet nothing is lost.

The recklessly rash die. The cautiously courageous live. Of these two courses it is uncertain which is advantageous and which is disadvantageous, for who can explain why heaven disapproves? Therefore even the Holy Man feels a difficulty here. This is the way of heaven:

Goodwill, which surely overcomes.

Silence, which certainly responds.

Without being summoned, spontaneously arriving.

Acting leisurely, but planning effectively.

Heaven's net spreads everywhere, wide in mesh, yet losing nothing.

He who shows courage in daring will perish;

He who shows courage in not-daring will live.

To know these two is to distinguish the one, benefit, from the other, harm.

Who can tell that one of them should be loathed by Heaven?

The Tao of heaven does not contend yet it surely wins the victory.

It does not speak; yet it surely responds.

It does not call; yet all things come of their own accord. The net of heaven is vast, and its meshes are wide; yet from it, nothing escapes.

Employing Deeming

If one is courageously presumptuous, then--killing.

If one is courageously non-presumptuous, then--living.

These pairings : one benefits, one harms.

That which nature despises, who knows its cause?

Using this, sages make it even more difficult.

The natural guide does not contend and yet is good at winning.

Does not discourse and yet skillfully responds.

Does not call and yet comes of itself.

Insensate and yet good at planning.

The natural net is all encompassing.

It is loose and yet nothing is lost.

Courageous but foolhardy, one perishes.

Courageous but not foolhardy, one's life is saved.

Between these two, one gains, the other loses.

Who knows what nature loathes?

Even the sage can hardly make a wise choice.

According to the way of heaven,

Without contending, one inevitably wins.

Without asking, one spontaneously receives a response.

Without invitation, success comes by itself.

Unintentionally, the heavenly way is well-devised.

The net of nature is all-embracing.

Although the spaces are large, nothing escapes it.

He who is brave and unscrupulous will meet his death.

He who is brave and cautious will stay alive.

Of these both, one leads to good, one leads to harm.

Everyone hates the bad - the reason why is clear.

That is why the sage is always cautious.

The Tao of Heaven does not fight but wins,

does not speak but is answered,

is not summoned but appears,

does not plan but consults.

The net of Heaven is widely cast;

the mesh is loose, yet nothing slips through.

Brave in daring, one gets killed;

Brave in not daring, one lives.

Of these two -

One is beneficial, one harmful.

That which heaven loathes -

Who knows its reason?

Heaven's Tao,

Without battling, excels in triumphing;

Without speaking, excels in responding;

Without being summoned, comes spontaneously;

Though loose, excels in planning.

Heaven's net is vast:

Though wide-meshed, misses nothing.

The person who shows courage in daring will perish.

The person who shows courage in a lack of daring will live.

To know these two things means to differentiate between the one, which is beneficial, and the other, which is harmful.

Who knows that heaven loathes one of them?

The superior Tao does not fight, yet it wins for certain.

It does not speak, yet it responds to everything.

It does not call, yet everyone comes to hear it.

It is not a tactician, yet it makes plans.

Heaven's net is all-embracing, and its holes are wide,

And even so, nothing escapes its sweep.

He who is fearless in being bold will meet with his death;

He who is fearless in being timid will stay alive.

Of the two, one leads to good, the other to harm.

Heaven
hates what it hates,

Who knows the reason why?

Therefore
even the sage treats some things as difficult.

The
way of heaven

Excels in overcoming though it does not contend,

In responding though it does not speak,

In attracting though it does not summon,

In laying plans though it appears slack.

The
net of heaven is cast wide.

Though the mesh is not fine, yet nothing ever slips through.

Daring to Act

Courage, if carried to daring, leads to death; courage, if not carried to daring, leads to life. Either of these two things is sometimes beneficial, sometimes harmful.

"Why 't is by heaven rejected,

Who has the reason detected?"

Therefore the holy man also regards it as difficult.

The Heavenly Reason strives not, but it is sure to conquer. It speaks not, but it is sure to respond. It summons not, but it comes of itself. It works patiently, but is sure in its designs.

Heaven's net is vast, so vast. It is wide-meshed, but it loses nothing.

Acting passionately can lead to trouble. Being indifferent, there is no trouble. The reasons why things happen can hardly be known, so we can't know if something is good or bad. By not trying to succeed, everything is successful. Without speaking, everything is said. By not seeking, it can be found. The natural way covers everything and every event like a net. Though its meshes may be wide, nothing slips through.

Courageous in accepting dare results in demise;

courageous in declining dare results in survival.

Between these two, there are advantages and disadvantages.

The cosmos has dislikes, but no one knows the reason.

It is hard even for the sage to explain.

The Direction of the cosmos,

though does not compete, is good at winning;

though wordless, is good at responding;

needs no invitation and comes on own volition;

and is at ease and is good at planning.

The cosmos's net is immense; it is loose but it does not miss.

To infuse daring with courage means death.

To infuse caution with courage means life.

The one enriches you, and the other ruins you.

No one knows why heaven

despises what it despises,

that's why a sage inhabits the complexity of things.

The Way of heaven never contends

and so overcomes perfectly,

never speaks

and so answers perfectly,

never summons

and so arrives of itself,

stays calm

and so plans perfectly.

The net of heaven is vast, woven so vast and wide open nothing slips through.

To be brave in daring results in a killing;

To be brave in not daring results in life.

Of the two, one is beneficial, the other harmful.

Whatever Heaven disfavours,

Who knows the reason?

(Thus even the sage considers this a difficult question.)

The way of heaven is good at:

Winning without striving;

Responding without announcing;

Forthcoming without prompting; and

Planing without haste.

The net of Heaven is extremely vast,

It is coarse but not leaking.

Bravery
in relation to venturing, next comes being killed

Bravery in relation to lack of venturing, next comes being mobile

Each of these two benefits some, harms some.

The place of the heaves dislikes

Who knows why it is so?

Appropriately
it happens that sages see it just as difficult.

The
tao of the heavens

Without contending yet values conquering

Without words yet values responding

Without summoning yet attracts to itself

Is easy-natured yet values a place for everything.

The
net of the heavens is vast, expansive

A coarse mesh yet without loss.

Active (warlike) courage procures death. Passive courage (patience, endurance) conserves life.

Therefore there are two courages, one harmful, the other beneficial. (Patience and forbearance are always worth more than incisive action, even in government, in politics). For does heaven wish harm, or not, to this or that man, or nation? ... And why? ... Who knows? - Therefore the Sage always acts as though embarrasses, (hesitating, making up his mind with difficulty before any active intervention).

For the way of heaven (its constant conduct), is not to intervene positively. It wins without fighting. It makes things obey without giving orders. It makes them come without calling them. It brings everything to its conclusion whilst having the appearance of letting everything drag.

The heavenly net catches all. Its mesh is wide, but no one escapes it.

The bold in daring will be killed

The bold in not daring will survive

Of these two, one may benefit, the other may harm

The one hated by heaven - who knows the reason?

Even the sages still find this difficult

The Tao of heaven:

Does not contend and yet excels in winning

Does not speak and yet excels in responding

Is not summoned and yet comes on its own

Is unhurried and yet excels in planning

The heavenly net is vast

Loose, and yet does not let anything slip through

Those who are bold and forward in being reckless tend to take unnecessary risks. Sooner or later, these risks catch up with them and cause their demise.

Those who are resolute in being cautious tend to be much more sensible. They advance while managing their risk exposure, so they can conserve their resources while continuing to thrive.

We can see that these two approaches yield very different results. The careful resolve may bring benefits, while the reckless charge may bring harm.

It seems as if heaven dislikes those who are rash and thoughtless, and punish them accordingly. It is as if it has a preference for courageous rationality. We do not know why this should be the case.

Even the sages still have a difficult time explaining it, because they have always known the Tao to be impartial and unbiased. Natural forces, being without human emotions, do not have likes or dislikes.

Perhaps it is all due to the nature of the heavenly Tao. For instance, we can see that the Tao contends with no one, and yet invariably wins out in the end. Water flows around an obstructing rock without challenging it or fighting it, but in time it is certain that the water will reduce the rock to nothing and wash it away.

The Tao does not speak as humans do, and yet it is infinitely responsive. For every action we impose, nature responds with an equal and opposite reaction. The response of the Tao is swift and certain.

We cannot summon the Tao, but no matter what we do, the Tao comes of its own accord. Whether good or bad, the Tao manifests itself in all of our endeavors. Good deeds bring positive karma; malice invokes negative karmic consequences.

The Tao process proceeds at a natural pace. The Tao is never rushed or frantic, and yet its infinite organizing power coordinates every event in the cosmos regardless of scale or distance. The universe is a pageantry of unimaginable complexity and precision, all choreographed by Tao, the ultimate planner.

The Tao can be likened to a net that stretches across the universe. All things exist within the meshes of its natural laws. This matrix of existence is loose and relaxed, and yet takes everything into account and does not leave anything out.

Notes

The final, unsaid element of this chapter is that those who possess courageous resolve but advance with caution are congruent with the Tao, and that is why they seem to be favored by the heavenly powers.

Note that this chapter makes an interesting distinction between courage and daring. Courage means being resolute, dauntless and firm; daring means throwing caution to the winds, full speed ahead and damn the torpedoes. One is an inner quality born of conviction, the other is an external display of bravado.

Those who possess this inner quality are similar to the Tao in the following ways:

1. Because they are unadventurous, they do not struggle against others, just as the Tao contends against no one. But despite this seemingly yielding nature, they consistently achieve their objectives in the long run.

2. They are quiet and unassuming, just as the Tao does not speak. However, they remain ever responsive to changing conditions out of their sense of caution. When circumstances change, they are ready to alter their approach to better aim for a moving target.

3. They are also fully present in all of their activities, just as the Tao is present in all things. They bring mindfulness to their work. By being totally aware in each moment of life, they enhance and deepen everything they do.

4. They are composed and prepared, just as the Tao plans and coordinates its myriad movements in a relaxed and unhurried way. They see how flowers bloom when the season is right and not a moment sooner, so they also take their time in thoughtful planning. By being well-prepared, they are able to act with composure and maximize their chances of success... when the time is right, and not a moment sooner.

ACTION IS DANGEROUS

Courage carried to daring leads to death. Courage restrained by caution leads to life. These two things, courage and caution, are sometimes beneficial and sometimes harmful. Some things are rejected by heaven, who can tell the reason? Therefore the wise man deems all acting difficult.

The Tao of heaven does not quarrel, yet it conquers. It speaks not, yet its response is good. It issues no summons but things come to it naturally because its devices are good. Heaven's net is vast, indeed! its meshes are wide but it loses nothing.

One who is courageous out of daring (kan) is killed.

One who is courageous out of not daring lives.

Of these two, this is beneficial while that is harmful.

What heaven hates, who knows the reason?

Therefore even the sage takes it to be difficult.

The way of heaven:

Without contending (cheng), it is yet good at winning,

Without speaking, it is yet good in responding,

Without being beckoned, it yet comes of its own accord,

Unhurried, it is yet good at planning (mou).

The net of heaven is vast,

Widely spaced, yet missing nothing.

One of courage, with audacity, will kill. One of courage, but gentle, spares life. From these two kinds of courage arise harm and benefit. Even if Tao dislikes certain people, who can say why? The truly wise regard this as a most difficult question. Tao does not content but it surely wins. It does not speak but it surely responds. It does not command but things come of themselves. It is empty yet contains the Master Plan. The net of Tao is all-encompassing, its meshes are wide, yet nothing is lost.

A man of daring courage will kill or be killed.

A man of cautious courage seeks to save lives.

Each of these may be either beneficial or harmful.

Heaven hates what it hates.

Who knows why?

Even the Tao–Master can't figure it out.

The Tao does not contend, but it prevails.

It does not speak, but it answers.

It is not called, but it responds.

It has no purpose, but it achieves all of its aims.

Heaven's net is wide; nothing slips through.

Seventy-three

A brave and passionate man will kill or be killed.

A brave and calm man will always preserve life.

Of these two which is good and which is harmful?

Some things are not favored by heaven. Who knows why?

Even the sage is unsure of this.

The Tao of heaven does not strive, and yet it overcomes.

It does not speak, and yet is answered.

It does not ask, yet is supplied with all its needs.

It seems to have no aim and yet its purpose is fulfilled.

Heaven's
net casts wide.

Though its meshes are course, nothing slips through.

Bravery in being bold leads to death;

Bravery in being timid leads to life.

These two kinds of bravery,

One leads to good the other to harm,

Who knows why

Heaven hates what it hates?

Even the sage feels it difficult to understand.

This is the Tao of heaven:

To excel in triumphing by means of non-contention;

To be good at answering by means of taciturnity;

To attract people by using no summons;

To be quick in planning by acting slowly.

The net of heaven is spread wide and far,

Though the mesh is largely knit,

Nothing can slip through the net.

Being brave in daring leads to death,

Being brave in not daring leads to life.

Of these two,

One is advantageous and the other injurious.

What Heaven detests -

Who knows its reason?

Therefore even the sage finds it hard to tell.

The way of Heaven -

It never contends yet is good at winning,

It never speaks yet is good at responding.

It comes of itself without being invited,

It seems remiss yet good at planning.

Heaven's net is vast.

Though its meshes are coarse, nothing escapes it.

Brave and reckless will be killed.

Brave but prudent will survive.

Two different types of bravery have dissimilar outcomes:

one is beneficial but the other is disastrous.

Why Providence dislikes one but not the other is a puzzle.

Even the sage is unable to fathom the reason.

The way of Dao is to accomplish without contention;

To evoke response without utterance;

All things come to pay homage without being told.

Dao does not resort to scheming but its plan is perfect.

The dragnet cast by Providence has wide meshes,

Yet, no wrongdoers ever slip through.

Natural Action

Ren Wei

Courage in daring leads to slaughter;

Courage in daring not leads to life.

Either may have its advantage or disadvantage.

When Heaven detests anything,

Who can know the reason why?

Thus even the Sage feels some difficulty here.

Heaven's way does not contend, yet excels in winning;

It does not speak, yet excels in making response;

It receives no summons, yet would come of itself;

It is patient and easy-going, yet excels in planning.

The net of Heaven spreads far and wide;

Though its meshes are large,

Yet it allows nothing to slip through.

He whose courage is shown in rashly daring will be killed;

He whose courage is shown in not rashly daring will live.

Of these two either may be harmful, either may be beneficial;

And who shall say which of them is hated by Heaven?

(Even the Sage sees a difficulty here.)

The Tao of Heaven does not contend, yet knows the way to win;

It does not speak, yet knows how to get the right answer;

It does not beckon, yet all things come to it freely,

In stillness and without haste, it carries out its well-laid plans.

The net of Heaven is vast, but though its mesh is wide,

Nothing escapes.

The brave in daring dies;

The brave in not-daring lives.

Of these two,

One helps, the other hurts.

Heaven may hate,

But who knows why?

This question stumps the sage.

It is the Tao of heaven

To conquer without competing,

To answer without speaking,

To attract without summoning,

To get results without hastening.

Vast is heaven's net and wide-meshed,

Yet nothing slips through.

He who is brave in daring will meet an unnatural death.

He who is brave in gentleness will be preserved.

Of these two kinds of bravery, one is beneficial, while the other proves harmful.

The subtle truth of the universe does not support those who are brave in daring,

yet there are still many people who do not understand such apparent truth.

So, even the one who integrates his being with the subtle essence of the universe,

dares not make light of the subtle law of life.

The subtle Way of the universe gave birth to a world of peace and order.

It responds to the order and harmony of all beings and things without needing to talk to them.

Without your summoning it, it comes to you.

Without scheming, its plan is perfect.

Vast is the subtle energy network of the universe.

Sparsely meshed it is, yet nothing can slip through it!

LXXIII.

Trusting
In Action

Whose
courage makes him dare is slain,

He
lives whom courage makes refrain,

And
harm or profit each will gain;

But Heaven s
hate, what could compel

That
it on this or that one fell,

Tis
even hard for sage to tell.

Not
to strive is Heaven s way,

And
yet it conquers; naught to say,

Yet
answers; will uncalled obey;

Its
perfect plans in s1owness hide,

The
net of Heaven has meshes wide,

But
through its meshes none can glide.

A man with courage and daring is slain,

A man with courage and self-restraint lives.

Of these two, the one has benefit, the other has injury.

Who can tell why one of them should incur Heaven's Wrath?

Because of this the self-controlled man has doubt and difficulty.

Heavenly Tao strives not, but conquers by love;

It speaks not, but responds in Love;

It calls not to men, but of themselves they come;

It slowly is made manifest, yet its plans are laid in Love.

The net of Heaven is widely meshed; the meshes are far apart, yet nothing escapes from it.

The man who is brave

and takes unneeded chances

will be killed;

The man who is brave

and does not take unneeded chances will survive.

Of these two kinds of bravery,

one proves harmful,

while the other is helpful.

Some things

are hated by the Laws of the Universe,

But who knows the reason?

Even the Complete Thinker

does not understand

such a question.

It is the Universal Law,

to win without effort.

It is the Universal Law

to get answers without speaking.

It is the Universal Law

To get the people to come

without calling them.

It is the Universal Law

To act agreeing to plans without hurry.

Powerful, beyond knowing are the Laws of the Universe:

Visible only by its results

and yet

Only the formless

can create new results.

He who is brave in daring, is killed.

He who is brave in not-daring, will live.

Of these two course the one is profitable and the other harmful. Who knows the cause of what heaven hates?

It is the Way of heaven not to strive and yet be able to conquer; not to speak and yet be able to respond; not to call and yet let things come of themselves; to be slow and yet be able to plan well.

Heaven's net is wide; though its meshes be far apart, nothing escapes it.

He whose boldness appears in his daring (to do wrong, in

defiance of the laws) is put to death; he whose boldness appears in

his not daring (to do so) lives on. Of these two cases the one

appears to be advantageous, and the other to be injurious. But

When
Heaven's anger smites a man,

Who the cause shall truly scan?

On
this account the sage feels a difficulty (as to what to do in the

former case).

It
is the way of Heaven not to strive, and yet it skilfully

overcomes; not to speak, and yet it is skilful in (obtaining a reply;

does not call, and yet men come to it of themselves. Its

demonstrations are quiet, and yet its plans are skilful and effective.

The meshes of the net of Heaven are large; far apart, but letting

nothing escape.

One
who is brave in daring will be killed.
One who is brave but not in daring
will survive.
One of these two courses is beneficial, the other harmful.

Who
knows the reason for Heaven's preferences?
The
way of Heaven is to not make war,
yet it is good at conquering;
does
not expound,
yet is good at answering;
will not be ordered-about,

yet comes of it's own free will;
is unconcerned,
yet good at making
plans.
Heaven's
net is vast;
though it's mesh is wide,
NOTHING ESCAPES.

The
way is very easy

Its purposes prevail

When all is done in silence

Intention cannot fail

Its
net is vast and over all

With meshes large and wide

Yet it loses nothing

Holds everything inside

HE who is brave in daring will be killed;

He who is brave in not daring will survive.

Of these two kinds of bravery, one is beneficial, while the other proves harmful.

Some things are detested by Heaven,

But who knows the reason?

Even the Sage is baffled by such a question.

It is Heaven's Way to conquer without striving,

To get responses without speaking,

To induce the people to come without summoning,

To act according to plans without haste.

Vast is Heaven's net;

Sparse-meshed it is, and yet

Nothing can slip through it.

The brave who value daring and killing will kill.

The brave who value life and virtue will let live.

Of these two kinds of bravery, Heaven sees one as good, and the other as bad, but why?

Even the sage has difficulty with such a question.

Who can understand the ways of Heaven?

The Way of heaven does not strive and yet it skillfully achieves victory.

It says nothing yet responds fully.

It does not summon, but all things come to it of their own accord.

It does not make a plan, but accomplishes all things perfectly.

The net of Heaven is wide and covers all. The mesh is widely woven, yet nothing slips through.

Being overbold and confidant is deadly.

The wise use of caution will keep you alive.

One
is the way to death,

and the other is the way to preserve your life.

Who can understand the workings of Heaven?

The
Tao of the universe

does not compete, yet wins;

does not speak, yet responds;

does not command, yet is obeyed;

and does act, but is good at directing.

The
nets of Heaven are wide,

but nothing escapes its grasp.

Imagine that there are two kinds of courage. One is an active courage that gets people killed. The other is an inner courage that keeps people alive. Which of these two is better?

No one can answer that for you. Each has its benefits and its drawbacks. Tao has no preferences.

Keeping in mind that Tao means how: how things happen. But how-things-happen is not the same as what-should-I-do. No one can tell you what to do. That is your freedom. That is your responsibility.

Instead of asking for advice, learn to become more conscious of what is actually happening. Then you will be able to see for yourself how things happen. You can make your own decisions about what to do.

Tao does not preach sermons or dictate behaviour. What people do is their own responsibility. But the pattern of their behaviour follows natural law.

This law is so general, it covers every possible event. It is so specific, it applies to every instance of every event.

But no one can decide for you what to do in a given situation. That is up to you.

A soldier who has the courage to fight will eventually be killed.

But one who has the courage not to fight will live.

In these two, one is good and the other harmful.

Who knows why Heaven allows some things to happen?

Even the Sage is stumped sometimes.

The Way of Heaven Does not compete, but is good at winning;

Does not speak, yet always responds;

Does not demand, but is usually obeyed;

Seems chaotic, but unfolds a most excellent plan.

Heaven's net is cast wide

And though its meshes are loose,

Nothing is ever lost.

A
distinguishing man in his righteousness

is prepared to kill or be killed in

the name of righteousness.

A non-distinguishing woman is indifferent

and refuses to even consider killing.

Both types of people occupy the world forever.

They are one

and undistinguished by Infinity.

Infinity
does not contend

but through oneness overcomes all things.

It does not speak but is the

answer to all questions.

It does not summons

but all things are attracted to it.

It makes no plans and has no goals

but all things are manifested by it.

The
net of Infinity is all encompassing.

The mesh is large

yet nothing slips through.

Courage to act means death.

Courage not to act means life.

Of these two, one brings profit and one brings ruin, which Heaven loathes.

Who knows the reason why.

Heaven's Way is to succeed without struggle,

to respond without words,

to summon without commands.

Worship properly, but plan well.

Heaven's net is all-embracing.

Its mesh is wide, but overlooks nothing.

He who is courageous in taking action is soon killed.

He who is courageous in remaining passive keeps his life.

Of the two kinds of courage, one is harmful and the other is advantageous.

Who knows why Heaven disapproves of one kind?

Even the Sage is unsure how to answer this.

The Way of Heaven accomplishes without competing;

Without declaring its will it receives a response;

Without summoning, things come to it of their own accord;

It accomplishes slowly, with well-laid plans.

The net of Heaven is vast,

And though its mesh is very wide,

Nothing can slip through.

One who is brave enough to dare gets death.

One who is brave enough not to dare gets life.

The big difference between the two

Is the result of heaven's intervention.

And that is where the ruler should hesitate.

Heaven's way wins without fighting,

Responds without being asked,

Comes to the rescue without being summoned,

And has wonderful schemes within a simple expanse.

Heaven's net of law is the most sparsely woven,

But it is the biggest and lets off no criminals.

"One who shows bravery by being daring will get killed one who shows bravery by not being daring will survive.'

But in both these cases: "Sometimes it helps, sometimes it harms." "What Heaven picks to hate - who knows the reason?" And so the Wise Person: Treats things as difficult.

Heaven's Way: Not contending, but excels at overcoming not speaking, but excels in getting answers not summoning, but people come of themselves lax, but excels at organization.

Heaven's net is very wide - loosely woven, but it lets nothing slip by.

He who is brave and bellicose will be killed; he who is brave but not bellicose will live.

What is the reason for dislike toward bellicose people? Even a sage cannot answer.

Great Tao abides in calm; It does not fight with anyone. It wins without violence.

It is silent, yet It answers questions and comes to those who call It.

In calm, It controls everything.

It selects worthy people for Itself.

A courageous man who does not control himself,

Either kills or is killed.

But a courageous man, himself in control, lives,

The heaven protects the one who does not harm anyone.

The Tao Way is similar,

Being neither opposing nor struggling to go forwards.

Although does not speak out, it gets an answer.

Although does not ask for anything, obtains everything.

Although does not want to achieve anything, all is achieved.

In
its immensity, Tao seems to be empty,

But it is like a sieve that follows the laws of matter.

When
one is brave at acting bold then one will be killed. When one is brave at not
acting bold then one will live. [Of] these two [one] may involve benefit [and
one may involve] injury. Who knows the reason for what Heaven hates. <For
that reason the Sage treats it as especially difficult.> The Dao of Heaven
does not contend and yet is good at winning, does not speak and yet is good
at responding, does not summon yet things come to it of their own accord, is
in repose and yet good at laying plans. The vast net of Heaven is coarse, yet
nothing escapes it.

To be brave in daring is to be killed.

To be brave in not daring is to live.

Both of them are either beneficial or harmful.

Who knows the real reason for heaven's hatred?

Even the Sage would find it difficult.

The Tao of heaven does not compete, but is good in winning;

does not speak, but is good in responding;

does not summon, but things come by themselves;

behaves calmly, but is good in planning.

The net of heaven is so vast.

Although it is wide open, it loses nothing.

Nature's Way

Those bold in daring will die;

Those bold in not daring will survive.

Of these two, either may benefit or harm.

Nature decides which is evil,

But who can know why?

Even Evolved Individuals regard this as difficult.

The Tao in Nature

Does not contend,

Yet skillfully triumphs.

Does not speak,

Yet skillfully responds.

Does not summon,

And yet attracts.

Does not hasten,

Yet skillfully designs.

Nature's network is vast, so vast,

Its mesh is coarse, yet nothing slips through.

The Dao does not speak and it cannot be spoken. It has no design and is nowhere. Yet everywhere is it found and its work is always complete.

A brave man who dares to, will kill;

A brave man who dares not, spares life;

And from them both come good and ill;

"God hates some folks, but who knows why?"

The Wise Man hesitates there too:

God's Way is bound to conquer all

But not by strife does it proceed.

Not
by words does God get answers:

He calls them not and all things come.

Master plans unfold but slowly,

Like God's wide net enclosing all:

Its mesh is coarse but none are lost.

He who is brave in daring everything will be killed,

And he who is brave in daring nothing will live on.

Of the results of the two kinds of braveness, one is advantageous, the other is harmful.

When Heaven has some detestation,

Who can know its cause?

So even the sage feels it difficult to explain.

It is the Tao (Way) of Heaven:

Not to struggle and yet be good at winning,

Not to speak and yet be good at replying,

Without being called it comes of itself,

though slow, it plans skillfully.

The net of Heaven is vast,

It has large meshes, but it lets nothing escape.

If one's bravery is expressed in daring, he will be killed.

If one's bravery is expressed in not daring, he will live.

But both these two sometimes result in benefit, sometimes in harm.

When Heaven is cruel, who understands why?

Therefore even the sage finds this fraught with danger.

The Dao of Heaven is such that one excels at winning without contending.

He excels at making people respond without speaking.

He spontaneously attracts without summoning.

He excels at planning while utterly at ease.

The net of Heaven spreads far and wide.

Though its mesh is coarse, it never loses anything.

1. If you're brave in being daring, you'll be killed;

2. If you're brave in not being daring, you'll live.

3. With these two things, in one case there's profit, in the other there's harm.

4. The things Heaven hates—who knows why?

5. The Way of Heaven is not to fight yet to be good at winning—

6. Not to speak yet skillfully respond—

7. No one summons it, yet it comes on its own—

8. To be at ease yet carefully plan.

9. Heaven's net is large and vast;

10. Its mesh may be coarse yet nothing slips through.

Those who dare
to be bold die.

Those who dare to be careful survive.

So--what do you want to do?

Why is life
like that, you ask?

I don't know.

This is how
Tao works:

It doesn't push itself,

and it always succeeds.

It acts silently, and it always reacts.

It can't be summoned;

it comes whenever it's ready.

It can't be rushed; it's always on time.

"Heaven
casts a wide net,

with big holes,"

Lao Tzu used to say,

"but nothing ever gets by it."

The Way of Heaven

Those brave in killing will be killed.

Those brave in not killing will live.

Of these two, one is good, and one is harmful.

Some are not favored by heaven. Who knows why?

Even the wise consider it a difficult question.

The Way of heaven does not strive; yet it wins easily.

It does not speak; yet it gets a good response.

It does not demand; yet all needs are met.

It is not anxious; yet it plans well.

The net of heaven is vast;

its meshes are wide, but nothing slips through.

Courage that swells to arrogance and recklessness ends in death.

Courage that wells up from humbleness and gentleness leads to life.

One brings disaster the other liberation.

Yet who pays attention to how heaven evaluates him?

The Sage considers the consequences and follows the way of the TAO.

TAO rules without force commands without commands calls without calls acts without deeds.

Its net of destiny is wide-meshed yet all-embracing and nothing slips through

On True Boldness

Lao Tze says,

He who is fearless in his daring to do wrong goes against the Tao, and meets with death.

He who is fearless in his not daring to do so, remains alive.

Of these two cases one is apparently advantageous, and the other harmful.

But when Heaven's hate imposes on a man, who would know why?

On this account even the sage feels it is difficult to understand.

The way of Heaven does not contend yet skillfully excels in overcoming;

it does not speak yet skillfully responds to asking;

it does not summon yet attracts men to it.

It is unselfish and magnanimous, yet its plans are skillful and effective.

The net of Heaven spreads wide with its meshes far apart;

yet it lets nothing slip through.

ACTING WITH A SUFFICIENCY

A
brave man who is passionate

will either kill or be killed,

but a man who is both brave and still

might preserve his own and others' lives.

No one can say with certainty,

why it is better to preserve a life.

The
virtuous way is a way to act

without contriving effort,

yet, without contriving it overcomes.

It seldom speaks, and never asks,

but is answered without a question.

It is supplied with all its needs

and is constantly at ease

because it follows its own plan

which cannot be understood by man.

It casts its net both deep and wide,

and 'though coarse meshed, it misses nothing in the tide.

The Tao is always at ease.

It overcomes without competing,

answers without speaking a word,

arrives without being summoned,

accomplishes without a plan.

Its net covers the whole universe.

And though its meshes are wide,

it doesn't let a thing slip through.

The courage of one daring to be aggressive will eventually kill his life.

The courage of one not daring to be aggressive will eventually ensure his life.

Between these two kinds of courage we know which one is good and which one is harmful.

Who knows the reason why?

Because it is hated by nature.

The law of Nature does not strive, yet achieves a perfect victory.

It does not use words, yet it is perfectly convincing.

It receives no call, yet it automatically responds.

It is plain and unnoticed, yet it is skillfully planned.

It covers every place all the time like a heavenly net, it seems to be wide meshed, yet it does not let anything slip away.

Courage combined with daring promotes killing.

Courage not combined with daring promotes life.

These two can be either beneficial or harmful.

Who knows the reason for what heaven hates?

The Tao of heaven is

Good at winning without fighting,

Good at responding without speaking,

Appearing without being asked,

Good at strategizing while fighting.

The net of heaven is broad and loose,

Yet nothing slips through.

LXXIII

There
are two kinds of bravery

That which takes death lightly and that which takes life seriously

Where one needs to be brave either will suffice

But they are not both in line with the tao

The
tao honors what can win without belligerence

What can respond without speaking

For such, everything needed comes on its own without being called

Everything desired is achieved without being planned

It
pays to remember that the tao casts its net far and wide

Its cord may look flimsy and its mesh coarse, but nothing escapes it

Boldness in Daring Means Killing

Boldness in daring means killing;

boldness in not daring means life.

These two may help and may harm.

Who knows the reason for what heaven dislikes?

This is why even sages

find it hard for them.

The Way of heaven

wins well without contest,

responds well without speech,

comes of itself uncalled,

relaxed yet very resourceful.

The net of heaven is vast;

the holes are large

but don't let slip.

When courage is combined with boldness, one dies.

When courage is combined with prudence, one survives.

Of the two, which is beneficial and which is harmful?

It is hard to know what Heaven dislikes.

This is why even sages feel the difficulty.

The Tao of the nature is that:

The best winnings come without rivaling.

The best responses are not wordy.

The best friends come without formal invitation.

The best plans are made when relaxed.

Heaven's net is wide.

Although it has meshes, nothing escapes from it.

He who is brave in daring will be killed.

He who is brave in not daring will survive.

Of these two kinds of bravery, one is beneficial, while the other is harmful.

Some things are hated by Heaven, but who knows the reason?

Even the sage does not know it.

It is Heaven's Way not to contend but win, not to speak but respond, not to be summoned but come, to be relaxed but lay good plans.

Heaven's net is vast, sparse-meshed, and yet nothing can slip through it.

A brave man who acts on his braveness will kill and be killed.

A brave man who not acts on his braveness will preserve life.

Of these two, one is good, the other is harmful.

God (Tien) despise something. Who knows what it is?

Even the sage is unsure of what it is.

The Tao of heaven, not compete, yet often victory,

not asking, yet often answered,

not calling, yet comes by itself,

seems unplanned, yet follows a plan.

Heaven's net (laws) casts wide.

Though its meshes are coarse, nothings slips through.

A person whose courage lies in daring will meet death.

A person whose courage lies in not daring

will encounter life.

Of the two courses, either may be beneficial or harmful.

Heaven
dislikes what it dislikes.

Who knows the reason why?

Even the True Person has difficulty with such a question.

The
Tao of Heaven

does not strive and yet it overcomes,

does not speak and yet it gets responses,

does not beckon and yet it attracts,

is at ease and yet it follows a plan.

The
net of heaven is cast wide.

Though the mesh is coarse, nothing ever slips through.

People
who are brave and who like dares

kill and destroy.

People who are brave and have no taste for daring

live and create.

Either may be appropriate,

both may be good and bad

still,

the universe has no taste for blood,

neither does the follower of the way.

The universe never tries to win

still,

it always does;

never tries to speak

still,

there is always an answer;

never tries to command

still,

everything is ordered.

The
net of the universe is wide ,

its mesh is wide

still,

nothing escapes.

Who is brave in daring can kill or get killed [on a bus].

On the other hand, one who is brave in not daring, can survive or give life.
Either approach can be profitable or unprofitable, still one of them is harmful.

Who is brave in non-daring without ado lets live. There can be some advantage
and some disadvantage in each approach -

Now,
"Dao-heaven hates the one it hates, hates what it hates; and none can know the
reason why." Who knows why and what it dislikes? Heaven dislikes certain people;
but the wise man considers it a tricky question. Yes, why heaven seems to hate
- even a wise man regards it as a tricky question.

Well,
it's in the fixed dao sets of heaven not to strive in the open, but none the
less to conquer. Not to compete, but all the same win expertly. Be good at conquest
without strife.

Dao
hardly speaks, it skilfully responds. It comes without skilful invitation, it
can appear without a call. It doesn't seem anxious about things and yet it shows
up it plans very well. It gets able results without obvious design, as from
hidden, laid, [broad] plans and schemes. [Say little, foster well laid schemes
and designs.]

Dao-heaven's
net is wide, with big, coarse meshes. Still it misses nothing. Nothing slips
through.

He who is brave in daring will be killed,

He who is brave in not daring will survive.

One of these two courses is beneficial,

The other is harmful.

Who knows the reason for heaven's dislikes?

The Way of heaven

does not war yet is good at conquering,

does not speak yet is good at answering,

is not summoned yet comes of itself,

is relaxed yet good at making plans.

Heaven's net is vast;

Though its meshes are wide, nothing escapes.

He whose courage is expressed in daring will soon meet death.

He whose courage is shown in self-restraint will be preserved.

There are, then, two kinds of courage; the one is injurious and the other of advantage.

But who is to say why one of them should incur the judgement of Heaven?

That is why the Sage finds it difficult to act.

The celestial Tao does not strive, and yet overcomes everything.

It does not speak, yet is skilful in replying.

It does not call, yet things come to it readily.

It is quiet in its methods, yet its plans are thoroughly effective.

The net of Heaven has large meshes, and yet nothing escapes it!

Spring of Love

The presence of the Tao

living in your relationship is certain.

You do not need to understand it.

It will not impose itself upon you.

It will not work according to your plan.

Yet it will never fail to accomplish its purpose.

It is within you like a spring

of unconditional love.

It will quench your fears

and nourish your life together.

When your life together seems dry and dusty,

imagine yourself a well-digger.

Not far beneath the surface

is the water that will refresh and renew.

Imagine how it will feel when you find it.

Dig for it.

Trust that it will be there.

He who is brave in daring will be killed. He who is brave in not daring will live.

Of these two, one is advantageous and one is harmful. Who knows why
Heaven dislikes what it dislikes? Even the sage considers it a difficult
question.

The Way of Heaven does not compete, and yet is skillfully achieves
victory. It does not speak, and yet it skillfully responds to things. It
comes to you without your invitation. It is not anxious about things
and yet it plans well.

Heaven's net is indeed vast. Though its meshes are wide, it misses nothing.

A man with outward
courage dares to die,

A man with inward courage dares to live;

But either of these men

Has a better and a worse side than the other.

And who can tell exactly to which qualities heaven objects?

Heaven does nothing to win the day,

Says nothing-Is echoed,

Orders nothing-Is obeyed,

Advises nothing-Is right:

And which of us, seeing that nothing is outside the vast

Wide-meshed net of heaven, knows just how it is cast?

If you have the courage to be strong, you will fail;

If you have the courage to be weak, you will succeed.

These two courages have completely opposite results.

Who knows why the heavens does not like the strong?

Even the great men found this question difficult to answer.

The law of the heavens never fights but always wins,

Never speaks but always gets a response,

Never calls but always gets an answer,

Moves slowly but has everything arranged perfectly.

The law of the heavens is like a huge net; the net holes are large, but nothing can escape.

Courage in daring action will lead to death.

Courage in caring action will lead to life.

Of these two, one is beneficial and the other harmful.

Heaven does not favor harmful courage,

Yet, there are few who really know the reason.

Thus, the sage does not make light of this truth.

He who abides by the way of Heaven

Triumphs without fighting,

Responds without chattering,

Reaches out without being asked,

Plans ahead without being impetuous.

Though its meshes may appear wide,

Through the vast net of heavenly law,

Nothing can ever slip.

One who is brave enough to dare gets death.

One who is brave enough not to dare gets life.

The big difference between the two

Is the result of heaven's intervention.

And that is where the ruler should hesitate.

Heaven's way wins without fighting,

Responds without being asked,

Comes to the rescue without being summoned,

And has wonderful schemes within a simple expanse.

Heaven's net of law is the most sparsely woven,

But it is the biggest and lets off no criminals.

The brave who value daring and killing will kill.

The brave who value life and virtue will let live.

Of these two kinds of bravery, Heaven sees one as good, and the other as bad, but why?

Even the sage has difficulty with such a question.

Who can understand the ways of Heaven?

The Way of heaven does not strive and yet it skillfully achieves victory.

It says nothing yet responds fully.

It does not summon, but all things come to it of their own accord.

It does not make a plan, but accomplishes all things perfectly.

The net of Heaven is wide and covers all. The mesh is widely woven, yet nothing slips through.

