===== Chapter 39 =====

Those which of old obtained the One:

Heaven obtained the One and thus clarity.

Earth obtained the One and thus repose.

Spirits obtained the One and thus animation.

Waterways obtained the One and thus fullness.

The ten-thousand things obtained the One and thus livelihood.

Lords and kings obtained the One and thus became dedicated to the world.

This conveys it:

Heaven, without means of clarity, would fearfully split open.

Earth, without means of repose, would fearfully be terminated.

Spirits, without means of animation, would fearfully come to an end.

Waterways, without means of fullness, would fearfully be used up.

The ten-thousand things, without means of livelihood, would fearfully die

away.

Lords and kings, without means of dedication, would fearfully stumble and

fall.

This is the reason nobility therefore takes lowliness as the root.

The high therefore takes the low as the foundation.

Therefore, the lords and kings called themselves

"Orphaned," "bereft," and "unfortunate."

Isn't this "taking lowliness as the root" considered wrong?

Not at all!

The utmost honor is not renowned.

Do not desire jade-like stones as if [they were truly] jade.

Jade beads are like rocks.

Of old, these attained the One: Heaven attaining the One Became clear.
Earth attaining the One Became stable. Spirits attaining the One Became
sacred.

Valleys attaining the One Became bountiful. Myriad beings attaining the
One Became fertile. Lords and kings attaining the One Purified the
world.

If Heaven were not clear It might split. If Earth were not stable It might erupt. If spirits were not sacred They might fade.

If valleys were not bountiful They might wither. If myriad beings were
not fertile, They might perish. If rulers and lords were not noble, They
might stumble.

Therefore, Noble has humble as its root, High has low as its foundation.

Rulers and lords call themselves Poor and lonely orphans. Isn't this using humility as a root?

They use many carriages But have no carriage;.

They do not desire to glisten like jade But drop like a stone.

In days of old these became whole:

Having become whole, heaven became clear.

Having become whole, earth became stable.

Having become whole, spirits became vibrant.

Having become whole, valleys became full.

Having become whole, the myriad things became alive.

Having become whole, the nobles set the realm right.

This is what they achieved by becoming whole.

If heaven had not become clear

It would likely break open.

If earth had not become stable

It would likely collapse.

If spirits had not become vibrant

They would likely cease to exist.

If valleys had not become full

They would likely become exhausted.

If the myriad things had not become alive

They would likely die.

If the nobles had not become esteemed

They would likely fall.

Thus the nobles have the commoners as their root.

And the high rank has the low rank as its base.

And the high rank has the low rank as its base.

That is why "orphans," "lonely" and "worthless"

Are the names kings and lords use for themselves.

Do they not have the commoners as their root?

Too much honor is no honor.

They don't wish to glitter like gemstones.

They prefer to rumble like rocks.

THE UNIFIED WHOLE

From ancient times, there was an understanding of All Things as a unified whole,

Arising as from one.

Understanding and possessing this unity:

- Heaven attains purity and clarity.

- Earth attains stability and tranquility.

- Spirit attains life and essence.

- Valley attains fullness and fruitfulness.

- All Things attain creative life and growth.

- Leaders attain responsiveness.

All this - arising as from one, Is the true nature of things..

Were it not for:

- Purity and clarity, the heavens would cease.

- Stability and tranquility, the earth would crumble.

- Fullness and fruitfulness, The valley would become a barren desert.

- Creative life and growth, All Things would become extinct.

- Responsiveness to leadership, The leader would fail and his subjects suffer.

The humble is the stem upon which the exalted grows.

The lowly is the foundation for the mighty.

Leaders of old, recognizing their dependence upon the lowly and humble for their success,

Called themselves orphaned, needy, worthless.

True understanding, as is the chariot,

Is not recognizable or useful as such, from its parts;

Its recognition and use coming from its assemblage into a unified whole.

A true Leader will not spoil the unity of his empire,

By putting himself far above his subjects.

He will not jingle rare jade bells in front of his subjects,

Who themselves possess mere common stone chimes.

In ancient times there was unity.

Heaven benefited from unity and became pure.

Earth benefited from unity and became stabilized.

The soul benefited from unity and became divine.

The valleys benefited from unity and became bountiful.

Ten-thousand things (everything) benefited from unity and were born.

All people benefited from unity and became Heaven below's (the sacred body's) high principle.

They achieved this.

Without purity, fear would split Heaven apart.

Without solidity, fear would cause the Earth to crumble.

Without divinity, fear would shut down the soul.

Without abundance, fear would deplete the valleys.

Without birth, fear would cause the ten-thousand things to perish.

Without taking in hand their exalted treasure, fear would cause the people to stumble.

Thus, value is rooted in humble action.

High positions are humble and form the foundation.

When people say orphans and widows are not worthy, it surely is not the root of humble action.

Surely not!

Therefore, looking for praise does not bring success.

Do not desire to sparkle, sparkle like a jewel.

Instead, resemble a necklace, a necklace of rocks.

THE LAW OF THE BEGINNING

These things have possessed the Tao from the beginning: Heaven, clear and

shining; Earth, steady and easy; Spirits, mighty in Magick;

Vehicles, overflowing with Joy; all that hath life; and the rulers of men.

All these derive their essence from the Tao.

Without
the Tao, Heaven would dissolve Earth disrupt, Spirits become

impotent; Vehicles empty; living things would perish and rulers lose

their power.

The
root of grandeur is humility, and the strength of exaltation in its

base. Thus rulers speak of themselves as 'Fatherless,' 'Virtueless,'

'Unworthy,' proclaiming by this that their Glory is in their shame. So

also the virtue of a Chariot is not any of the parts of a Chariot, if they be

numbered. They do not seek to appear fine like jade, but inconspicuous like

common stone.

The things which from of old have got the One (the Tao) are

Heaven which by it is bright and pure; Earth rendered thereby firmand sure; Spirits with powers by it supplied; Valleys kept full throughtheir void; All creatures which through it do live; Princes and kings whofrom it get The model which to all they give.

All these are the results of the one (Tao).

If heaven were not thus pure, it soon would rend; If earth were notthus sure, 'twould break and bend; Without these powers, the spirits soonwould fail; If not so filled, the drought would parch each vale; Withoutthat life, creatures would pass away; Princes and kings, without that moralsway, However grand and high, would all decay.

Thus it is that dignity finds its (firm) root in its (previous) meanness,and what is lofty finds its stability in the lowness (from which it rises).Hence princes and kings call themselves 'Orphans,' 'Men of small virtue,'and as 'Carriages without a nave.' Is not this an acknowledgment that intheir considering themselves mean they see the foundation of their dignity?So it is that in the enumeration of the different parts of a carriage wedo not come on hat makes it answer the ends of a carriage. They do notwish to show themselves elegant-looking as jade, but (prefer) to be coarse-lookingas an (ordinary) stone.

About the men of old that had reached perfection

We know that they felt one with the whole creation

That they saw the earth not as chaos but as a unity

That they felt like gods and spiritual beings

That emptiness was no longer empty, but filled

And they saw that the whole creation was inspired

Thanks to their wholeness the world returned to its original order

For one who doesn't see clearly, the creation is splintered

For one who places oneself outside nature, the earth is chaos

One who doesn't experience oneself as divine anymore, feels powerless

One who does not experience one's perfection anymore, feels empty

People who deny their true nature, go to rack and ruin

Therefore they say:

Humility is the source of truthfulness

Smallness the source of grandeur

One who feels elevated over ones fellow men

Isn't right, is unworthy and small

After all, they climbed up high over other people's backs

Therefore their richness is poverty

And their gold just tinsel

There are things that have always maintained their own self-activity. The tendency to initiate is, by its self-activity, obviously self-originating. The tendency towards completion is, by its self-activity, always self-perfection. The tendency to maintain integrity, by its self-activity, sustains integrity. The tendency to oppose is, by its self-activity, sufficient for all opposition.

It is by self-activity that all things fulfill themselves. So it is by self-activity that the world is governed. Such is the extent of self-activity.

If the tendency to initiate were not clearly such, it would be ineffective. If the tendency toward completion were not dependable, things would be chaotic. If the tendency to maintain integrity were not persistent, things would disintegrate. If the tendency toward opposition were not sustained, vitality would disappear.

If there were no self-activity, life would cease. If self activity did not govern, then disruption would set in.

The esteemed must depend upon others for their esteem, whereas the unesteemed are self-sufficient. The high must depend on the low for its foundations, whereas the low serves as its own foundation.

Therefore intelligent leaders consider themselves as independent, self-sufficient, and unesteemed. For, must not the unesteemed be the basis for the esteemed?

Therefore the unesteemed are the ultimate in esteem.

One cannot be outstanding when he is alone, and he should not try to be so when he is with others.

As for the things that from of old have understood the Whole —

The sky through such understanding remains limpid,

Earth remains steady,

The spirits keep their holiness,

The abyss is replenished,

The ten thousand creatures bear their kind,

Barons and princes direct their people.

It is the Whole that causes it.

Were it not so limpid, the sky would soon get torn,

Were is not for steadiness, the earth would soon tip over,

Were it not for their holiness, the spirit would soon wither away.

Were it not for this replenishment, the abyss would soon go dry,

Were it not that ten thousand creatures can bear their kind,

They would soon become extinct.

Were the barons and princes no longer directors of their people

And for that reason honoured and exalted, they would soon be overthrown.

Truly " the humble is the stem upon which the mighty grows,

The low is the foundation upon which the high is laid."

That is why barons and princes refer to themselves as "The Orphan",

"The Needy", "The Ill-provided.

Is this not indeed a case of might rooting itself upon humility?

True indeed are the sayings:

"Enumerate the parts of a carriage,

And you still have not explained what a carriage is,"

And They did not want themselves to tinkle like jade-bells,

While others resounded like stone chimes".

Before time, these ancestors arise from One:

Heaven arises from One and becomes clear.

Earth arises from One and becomes firm.

Spirit arises from One and becomes divine.

Emptiness arises from One and becomes creation.

The ten thousand things arise from One

and become manifest.

Kings and princes arise from One

and become exalted.

One is the source of All.

Separated from the Source:

the clearness of heaven would vanish,

the firmament of earth would dissolve,

the divinity of spirit would dissipate,

creation would become desolation.

The ten thousand things would perish,

and kingdoms would disappear.

Humility is the root of honor.

Lowliness is the foundation of esteem.

Thus, a noble man considers himself

orphaned, bereft, unworthy.

This is knowing the humble source—is it not?

To seek praise is not praiseworthy.

Do not jangle like jewelry.

Be still as stone.

These things, from the beginning, have grasped wholeness:

Heaven attained the whole, becoming resolved

Earth attained the whole, becoming steady

Spirit attained the whole, becoming subtle

The valley attained the whole, becoming replenished

The myriad beings attained the whole, coming to life

Leaders & sovereigns attained the whole

as the way to attend to (all) under heaven

These things found it

Heaven, with no way to resolution,

would threaten to split apart

Earth, with no way to steadiness,

would threaten to open up

Spirit, with no way to subtlety

would probably perish

The valleys, with no way to replenishment,

would likely dry up

The myriad beings, with no way to life,

would likely be extinguished

Leaders and sovereigns,

with no way to dignity & prominence

would likely be toppled

In this way dignity regards the common as root

Prominence regards the humble as basis

This is why leaders & sovereigns refer to themselves

as orphaned & friendless, without worth

Does this not regard the common as root?

Not so?

Just as obtaining tallies of chariots

will not be (real) chariots

Do not long to dazzle & jingle like jade

Clunk & clatter like rocks

Wholeness

Of Those in ancient times

That attained the one -

Heaven by attaining the One became clear;

Earth by attaining the One became stable;

Gods by attaining the One became divine;

Valleys by attaining the One became full;

Kings and lords by attaining the One,

Made the whole land ordered and secure.

Talking this to its logical conclusion we would say -

If Heaven were not by means of it clear,

It would, I'm afraid, shatter.

If the Earth were not by means of it stable,

It would, I'm afraid, let go.

If the gods were not by means of it divine,

They would, I,m afraid be powerless.

If the valleys were not by means of it full,

They would, Im afraid, dry up.

And if kings and nobles

were not by means of it noble and high,

They would, I'm afraid, topple and fall.

Therefore it must be the case

That the noble has the base as its root;

And it must be the case

That the high has the low for its foundation.

Therefore kings and nobles call themselves

"The orphan", "The widower" and "The one without grain".

This is taking the base as one's root, is it not?!

Therefore they regard their large numbers of carriages

As having no carriage.

And because of this,

They desire not to dazzle and glitter like jade,

But to remain firm and strong like stone.

From ancient times these have attained oneness with Tao: Heaven attained oneness and became clear. Earth attained oneness and became peaceful. Spirits attained oneness and became strong.

Valleys attained oneness and became full. Beings attained oneness and became fertile. All are what they are by virtue of oneness.

Heaven without clarity would fall. Earth without peace would explode. Spirits without strength would dissipate.

Valleys without fullness would dry up. Beings without fertility would die off. Sages without wholeness would stumble and fall.

Humility is the root of greatness.

Those in high positions do well to think of themselves as powerless, small and unworthy. Isn't this taking humility for the root?

Attain honour without being honoured.

Don't shine like jade, or chime like bells.

From before Time as we know it was born,

The experience of Oneness with Tao has been.

To receive the gift of Oneness

Is the way of Nature,

Manifest in all its forms:

The open sky and stable earth,

The presence and energy of mind.

Through the One the valley fills

With the life of innumerable beings.

Sometimes, kings and lords receive it,

And are helped in their paths of leadership.

Were sky divorced from clarity,

Then I fear it might collapse in darkness,

Robbed of the union with Nature.

Should earth divorce its elastic firmness,

It would be crushed beneath its lifeless weight.

Were mind divorced from consciousness,

It would wither toward insanity and death.

Should the valley ever divorce abundance,

Then every form of being would perish.

These, indeed, are my greatest fears.

And if dukes and diplomats renounced

Their inner treasure to exalt superiority,

They would fall amid their own corruption.

Soft and small, the deepest roots

By which the greatest tree is nourished:

Humility within completes greatness without.

Indeed, there is nothing between them.

Thus did kings of old proclaim themselves

The small, the solitary, the impoverished:

For how can you fight against

Such an outspoken humility?

Could a carriage ever realize its design

If it were loaded down with fame and praise?

Do not presume to gleam like jade

When you live among the humble stones.

Lead With a Deep Unity

From
past ages there has been Unity:

the heavens achieved it and became clear,

the earth achieved it and became firm,

the valleys achieved it and became fertile,

the spirit achieved it and become inspired,

all things achieved it and became existent,

leaders achieved it and became good rulers.

Without
clarity the heavens would be tempestuous,

without firmness the earth would tremble,

without fertility the valleys would dry up,

without inspiration the spirit would be lost,

without existence all things would vanish,

rulers would falter and fall.

Thus
good leaders are humble.

The high are founded on the low

just as a chariot is made up of many small parts.

Better
to rumble like rocks (have depth)

than to jingle lightly like jewels (be flighty).

The things which from of old harmonized with the One are: The heavens, which through the One are clear; the earth, which through the One is reposeful; the gods, which through the One are spiritual; space, which through the One is full; whatever has form, which through the One develops; princes and monarchs, which through the One adjust the empire: these are all effects of the One.

Were the heavens not thus clear they would be liable to rend; were the earth thus not reposeful, it would be liable to frothiness; were the gods not thus spiritual, they would be liable to imbecility; were space thus not full, it would be liable to exhaustion; were that which had form not thus developed, it would be liable to

annihilation; were princes and monarchs not thus regulated, their dignities and honours would be liable to a downfall.

Hence humility is the root of honour: lowliness the foundation of loftiness. It is on this account that princes and monarchs style themselves "kithless," "friendless," "unworthies." Do they not thus acknowledge humility as their root?

The enumeration of the parts of a carriage no not make a carriage.

Desire neither the polish of the gem, nor the roughness of the stone.

From of old the things that have acquired Unity are these:

Heaven by Unity has become clear;

Earth by Unity has become steady;

The Spirit by Unity has become spiritual;

The Valley by Unity has become full;

All things by Unity have come into existence;

Princes and kings by Unity have become rulers of the world.

If heaven were not clear, it would be rent.

If earth were not steady it would be tumbled down.

If the Spirit were not active, it would pass away.

If the Valley were not full, it would be dried up.

If all things were not existing, they would be extinct.

If princes and kings were not rulers, they would be overthrown.

The noble must be styled in terms of the humble;

The high must take the low as their foundation.

Therefore princes and kings must call themselves 'the ignorant', 'the virtueless' and 'the unworthy'.

Does this not mean that they take the humble as their root? What men hate most are 'the ignorant', 'the virtueless' and 'the unworthy'.

And yet princes and kings chose them as their titles.

Therefore the higest fame is to have no fame.

Thus kings are increased by being diminished;

They are diminished by being increased.

It is undesirable to be as prominent as a single gem,

Or as monotonously numerous as stones.

Achieving Oneness

Things which from the beginning have achieved oneness:

Heaven achieves oneness in being clear.

Earth achieves oneness in stability.

Energy achieves oneness in spirit.

Valleys achive oneness in filling.

The ten-thousand natural kinds achieve oneness in life.

Fiefholders and Kings achieve oneness in deem-acting to make the social world
correct.

They take it to the extreme.

When heaven lacks that with which to become clear,

we're on the point of fearing splitting.

When earth lacks that with which to become stable,

we're on the point of fearing spreading out.

When energy lacks that with which to become spirit,

we're on the point of fearing death.

When valleys lack that with which to become full,

we're on the point of fearing depletion.

When the ten-thousand natural kinds lack that with which to become alive,

we're on the point of fearing extinction.

When fiefholders and kings lack that with which to become noble and exhalted,

we're on the point of fearing toppling.

Hence the noble uses the plebeian as its base.

The high uses the low as its foundation.

Using this: Feifholders and kings refer to themselves as 'this orphan,' 'this
lonely one,' and 'this impoverished one.'

Is this not taking the plebeian as the base?

It's not?!

Hence the extreme of numbering chariots is zero chariots.

Don't desire to colored veneer of jade

or the solid dullness of a rock.

In the remote past there were those who attained the One.

Attaining the One, heaven became pure.

Attaining the One, earth became peaceful.

Attaining the One, God became spiritual.

Attaining the One, the ocean became full.

Attaining the One, ten thousand things came into life.

Attaining the One, rulers became the models of the world.

All of them became so through the One.

Without becoming pure, heaven would have broken.

Without becoming peaceful, the earth would have quaked.

Without becoming spiritual, God would have crumbled.

Without becoming full, the ocean would have drained.

Without coming into life, ten thousand things would have perished.

Without becoming the models of the world, rulers would have stumbled.

Therefore, the worthless serves as the foundation of the worthy.

The inferior serves as the basis of the superior.

Thus, rulers call themselves isolated men, without merit, and worthless.

Is this not enough to prove that the worthless serve as the foundation of the worthy?

Hence, the perfect fame is no fame.

Rulers do not want to be esteemed as tingling jade; they would rather be plain, solid rock.

Since ancient times, what comes into possession is the 'One'.

Heaven in possession of the 'One' is clear.

The Earth in possession of the 'One' is tranquil.

The gods in possession of the 'One' are efficacious.

The valley in possession of the 'One' is full.

The myriad creatures in possession of the 'One' are alive.

The rulers in possession of the 'One' are faithful to their country.

Although they are different, they are the same 'One'.

When Heaven is not clear, it risks cracking.

When the Earth is not tranquil, it risks exploding.

When the gods are not efficacious, they risk ceasing to exist.

When the valley is not full, it risks drying up.

When the myriad creatures possess no life, they risk extinction.

When rulers are not faithful, they risk a fall from their heights.

Therefore the humble is the basis of the precious.

The low is the basis of the high.

The rulers shall humiliate themselves.

That is why one grows the root at the base - isn't it?

That is why one prefers to be the wheel instead of the carriage,

one chooses to be a stone instead of jade.

Long, long ago, those that acquired One were:

Heaven, which acquired One

And thereby became clear;

Earth, which acquired One

And thereby became tranquil;

Spirits, which acquired One

And thereby became miraculous;

Valley streams, which acquired One

And thereby became full;

Marquises and kings, who acquired One

And thereby became chieftains over all under heaven.

Going to the extreme would mean:

If heaven were excessively clear,

It would crack;

If earth were excessively tranquil,

It would quake;

If spirits were excessively miraculous,

They would cease to be so;

If valley streams were excessively full,

They would go dry;

If marquises and kings were endlessly noble and high,

They would collapse.

Therefore, the noble must take the humble to be their roots;

The high must take the low to be their basis.

Hence, marquises and kings call themselves "The inadequate one," "the deficient one" and "the unworthy one."

This means taking the humble to be their roots,

Does it not?

Therefore, the highest praise is no praise.

Hence, do not wish to be as noble as jade,

Nor as high as a mountain rock.

Among things, these are the ones that received the One in ancient times:

Heaven, that is made clear by the One,

Earth, that is stabilized by the One,

The soul, that is made spiritual by the One,

The valley, that is made full by the One.

Through the One, all things came into being and were realized,

Princes and kings, through the One, became rulers of the world.

If heaven were not clear, it could tear,

If earth were not stable, it could collapse,

If the soul were not active, it could dissolve,

If the valley were not full, it could dry up.

If things did not exist, they would be as if they had never been,

If princes and kings did not rule,

They would be thrown from their thrones.

The nobleman must measure himself in terms of the humble and simple man,

The dignitary must use the lowly as his basis.

Therefore, princes and kings call themselves "ignorant," "cowardly," "worthless."

Does that not mean that they consider humility to be the root of their nature?

For what does a person hate more than "ignorant," "cowardly," or "worthless"?

Yet princes and kings still choose these words to describe themselves.

Therefore there is no exaltation in this dignitary.

Thus kings rise by lowering their value,

And disappear by raising their value.

It is not good to be conspicuous, like a single gemstone,

Or monotonous and invisible like one of the countless stones in a field.

Of old, these came to be in possession of the One:

Heaven in virtue of the One is limpid;

Earth in virtue of the One is settled;

Gods in virtue of the One have their potencies;

The valley in virtue of the One is full;

The myriad creatures in virtue of the One are alive;

Lords and princes in virtue of the One become leaders of the empire.

It is the One that makes these what they are.

Without
what makes it limpid heaven might split;

Without what makes it settled earth might sink;

Without what gives them their potencies gods might spend themselves;

Without what makes it full the valley might run dry;

Without what keeps them alive the myriad creatures might perish;

Without what makes them leaders lords and princes might fall.

Hence
the superior must have the inferior as root;

The high must have the low as base.

Thus
lords and princes refer to themselves as 'solitary', 'desolate', and 'hapless'.

This is taking the inferior as root, is it not?

Hence
the highest renown is without renown,

Not wishing to be one among many like jade

Nor to be aloof like stone.

The Root of Order

From of old these things have obtained oneness:

"Heaven by oneness becometh pure.

Earth by oneness can endure.

Minds by oneness souls procure.

Valleys by oneness repletion secure.

"All creatures by oneness to life have been called.

And kings were by oneness as models installed."

Such is the result of oneness.

"Were heaven not pure it might be rent.

Were earth not stable it might be bent.

Were minds not ensouled they'd be impotent.

Were valleys not filled they'd soon be spent.

When creatures are lifeless who can their death prevent?

Are kings not models, but on haughtiness bent,

Their fall, forsooth, is imminent."

Thus, the nobles come from the commoners as their root, and the high rest upon the lowly as their foundation. Therefore, princes and kings call themselves orphaned, lonely, and unworthy. Is this not because they take lowliness as their root?

The several parts of a carriage are not a carriage.

Those who have become a unity are neither anxious to be praised with praise like a gem, nor disdained with disdain like a stone.

The Tao is not separate from mind, body and spirit. But mind, body and spirit can separate from the Tao. A clear mind and you are as open as the sky. A healthy body and you are as vital as the earth. A free spirit and you are bound to nothing. A mind which is divided by thoughts lacks clarity. A body which indulges the senses becomes ill. A spirit which is chained to the world will break. The master serves his mind, body and spirit all they require, and asks not a thing in return. With no will of his own, the Tao leads him to an unknown destination. How could this not be the greatest journey of man?

Among those with One in the past:

The cosmos, with One, produced cleanliness;

The earth, with One, produced calmness;

A shen, with One, produced responsiveness;

The valley, with One, produced fullness;

Myriad matters, with One, generated;

A Duke or Prince, with One, at the center of the world was seated.

Extending,

The cosmos, without One and without cleanliness, would be separated;

The earth, without One and without calmness, would be barren;

A shen, without One and without responsiveness, would be deserted;

The valley, without One and without fullness, would be depleted;

Myriad matters, without One and without growth, would stall;

Dukes and princes, without One and without being in the center, would fall.

Thus,

humbleness is the root of esteem;

lowness is the foundation of height.

Thus,

a Duke or Prince calls himself My Loneliness, The Isolated Person, The Ungracious Person.

Is this not humbleness as the root of esteem?

Is it not so?

Thus, the supreme honor requires no honor.

Aim not at jade's attractiveness, but at rock's solidness.

Ancients who realized primal unity:

Heaven realized primal unity

and so came to clarity.

Earth realized primal unity

and so came to tranquility.

Gods realized primal unity

and so came to spirit.

Valleys realized primal unity

and so came to fullness.

The ten thousand things realized primal unity

and so came to life.

Lords and emperors realized primal unity

and so came to rectify all beneath heaven.

It's their very existence:

without clarity heaven cracks open,

without tranquility earth bursts forth,

without spirit gods cease,

without fullness valleys run dry,

without life the ten thousand things perish,

without high nobility lords and emperors stumble and fall.

Nobility is rooted in humility,

and high founded on low.

This is why true lords and emperors call themselves

orphaned, destitute, ill-fated.

Isn't this rooted in humility?

Isn't it counting the world's praise as no praise,

refusing to tinkle like delicate jade bells or clatter like ponderous stone chimes?

Whichever has been endowed with the One:

Heaven becomes clear;

Earth becomes calm;

Spiritual beings become divine;

Valleys become full;

All things are striving;

Barons and kings are leaders of the world.

All these are due to the One. Otherwise:

Heaven would not be clear, and may disintegrate;

Earth would not be calm, and may quake;

Spiritual beings would not be divine, and may disappear;

Valleys would not be full, and may dry up;

All things would not be thriving, and may perish;

Barons and kings would not be noble and high, and may topple.

Therefore:

Humility is the basis for nobleness; and

Lowness the foundation for highness.

That is why barons and kings call themselves orphans, widowers and destitute beings.

Does it not prove humility being the basis for nobleness? Is it not?

Thus:

Strive for too many honours ends up with no honour.

Do not wish to be a shining jade, just be an ordinary rock.

From
old those which are with one:

Heavens with one, settling happens

Earth with one, a direction happens

Spirit with one, animation happens

Valley with one, fullness happens

The 10000 things with one, giving birth happens

Nobles and kings with one, pure action in the world happens.

These
are the results:

Heavens absent of settling will, I am afraid, crack

Earth absent of direction will, I am afraid, shake

Spirit absent of animation will, I am afraid, fall asleep

Valley absent of fullness will, I am afraid, be used up

The 10000 things absent of giving birth will, I am afraid,
die off

Nobles and kings absent of pure action will, I am afraid,
be set back.

So
it happens that the common acts as a root to the treasured

The lower acts as a base to the higher.

Appropriately
it happens

That kings and nobles call themselves orphaned, widowed,
unfavored.

Does it not happen that the common acts as root to the anomalous?

Are not these the same?

So
incur praise absent of praising

Be without desiring to tinkle, tinkle, as if jade

Clatter, clatter, as if stone.

The following participate in primitive simplicity: Heaven, which owes its luminosity to its simplicity. Earth, which owes its stability to it. The universal generative action, which owes its activity to it.

The median space, which owes its fecundity to it. The life common to all beings. The power of the emperor and the princes. (Life and power being emanations of the Principle). What makes them such as they are, is the (primitive) simplicity (in which they participate).

If heaven came to lose it, it would fall. If the earth came to lose it, it would lose its stability. If the generative action lost it, it should cease to act,

If the median space lost it, all beings would disappear. If the emperor and the princes should lose it, they would have no more dignity.

All elevation, all nobility, is based on abasement and simplicity (characteristics proper to the Principle).

Therefore it is right that the emperor and the princes, the most exalted of men, should be designated by the terms sole, unique, incapable, without them being thereby degraded.

(Applying the same principle of simplicity in their government), they should reduce the multitude of their subjects to unity, considering them with the same serene impartiality as an undivided mass,

not regarding some as precious jade and others like base stones.

Those that attained oneness since ancient times:

The sky attained oneness and thus clarity

The earth attained oneness and thus tranquility

The gods attained oneness and thus divinity

The valley attained oneness and thus abundance

The myriad things attained oneness and thus life

The rulers attained oneness and became the standard for the world

These are all from oneness

The sky, lacking clarity, would break apart

The earth, lacking tranquility, would erupt

The gods, lacking divinity, would vanish

The valley, lacking abundance, would wither

Myriad things, lacking life, would be extinct

The rulers, lacking standard, would be toppled

Therefore, the honored uses the lowly as basis

The higher uses the lower as foundation

Thus the rulers call themselves alone, bereft, and unworthy

Is this not using the lowly as basis? Is it not so?

Therefore, the ultimate honor is no honor

Do not wish to be shiny like jade

Be dull like rocks

The Tao is the central principle at the core of everything between Heaven and Earth. "Oneness" is where the Tao resides; it can also be a synonym for the Tao. This oneness manifests itself in many different ways: clarity, tranquility, divinity, life, and more.

Oneness manifests clarity in Heaven, tranquility on Earth, divinity in gods, and abundant life in all living things. In the same way, when we connect with the Tao described by Lao Tzu, we gain clarity in the mind, tranquility in the heart, divine power in spirituality, and abundant energy to live life to the fullest. Those who wish to lead must have this oneness in order to establish the standard of leadership.

Conversely, when we lack that connection, our experience is quite the opposite. We struggle with confusion in the mind; we feel unsettled and ill at ease; the spiritual strength we enjoyed before has become an empty void; we are tired, listless, and unable to stir ourselves into action. Whatever leadership we may want to establish collapses with nothing to hold it up.

How can we gain this oneness? How can we lead with the Tao, if called upon to lead? The clues are everywhere. Nature shows us that the high must be built upon the low. Tall trees grew from short saplings; in a mountain, its lower half supports the higher half, and most of the mountain supports its majestic peak. It is the same in life: the highest honor must be built upon low-profile, sincere humility.

This is why the sages never wish to shine brightly like expensive jewelry. Instead, they prefer to be more like plain rocks, with only steadfast, solid consistency, and no dazzling brilliance whatsoever. This is also why the rulers of ancient China tended to use the lowliest terms to refer to themselves. Over time, the practice lost its meaning, but its original intent was very much congruent with the Tao.

Notes

The concept of establishing a personal connection to the Tao, and thereby attain the power and energy of oneness is one that can cause much confusion. Isn't the Tao already in everything? How can one connect to it if one is never disconnected from it in the first place?

The Tao that we are inseparably part of is the all-encompassing Tao. It contains everything, with no distinctions whatsoever. In human beings, it is represented as the ambivalent, indeterminate state before any choices are made. In that state, the potential for every possible outcome exists - fulfilling, satisfying outcomes as well as disastrous, miserable outcomes.

The Tao of which Lao Tzu speaks is a particular path through this wealth of options. This path is quite specific. It is the path of silence, calmness, kindness and humility. It is not the path of cacophony, agitation, cruelty and arrogance. Both paths are part of the overall Tao that includes everything, but Lao Tzu points to one of them as the path that will best lead us to happiness and fulfillment.

THE ROOT OF AUTHORITY

It has been said of old, only those who attain unity attain self-hood. . . . Heaven attained unity and thereby is space. Earth attained unity, thereby it is solid. Spirit attained unity, thereby it became mind. Valleys attained unity, therefore rivers flow down them. All things have unity and thereby have life. Princes and kings as they attain unity become standards of conduct for the nation. And the highest unity is that which produces unity.

If heaven were not space it might crack, if earth were not solid it might bend. If spirits were not unified into mind they might vanish, if valleys were not adapted to rivers they would be parched. Everything if it were not for life would burn up. Even princes and kings if they overestimate themselves and cease to be standards will presumably fall.

Therefore nobles find their roots among the commoners; the high is always founded upon the low. The reason why princes and kings speak of themselves as orphans, inferiors and unworthy, is because they recognize that their roots run down to the common life; is it not so?

If a carriage goes to pieces it is no longer a carriage, its unity is gone. A true self-hood does not desire to be overvalued as a gem, nor to be undervalued as a mere stone.

Those of old that attain the One:

Heaven attains the One thus is clear,

Earth attains the One thus is peaceful,

Spirits attain the One thus are efficacious,

Valleys attain the One thus are replenished,

Ten thousand beings attain the One thus come to be,

Princes and barons attain the One thus are exalted in the world.

All because they attain the One.

Heaven, without that which renders it clear, might crack,

Earth, without that which renders it peaceful, might explode,

Spirits, without that which makes them efficacious, might cease,

Valleys, without that which replenishes them, might become empty,

Ten thousand beings, without that which sustains them in existence, might become extinct,

Barons and kings, without that which exalts them to high positions, might be toppled.

Therefore the exalted is rooted in the humble,

The high has the low for foundation.

Therefore barons and kings call themselves orphaned, widowed and unworthy.

Is this not taking the humble for one's root?

Is it not?

Therefore the most famous has no fame.

Do not tinkle like jade,

Or chime like stones!

Lead with a Deep Unity

From past ages there has been Unity: the heavens achieved it and became clear, the earth achieved it and became firm, the valleys achieved it and became fertile, the spirit achieved it and became inspired, all things achieved it and became existent, leaders achieved it and became good rulers.

Without clarity the heavens would be tempestuous, without firmness the earth would tremble, without fertility the valleys would dry up, without inspiration the spirit would be lost, without existence all things would vanish, rulers would falter and fail.

The good leaders are humble. The high are founded on the low just as a chariot is made up of many small parts.

Better to rumble like rocks (have depth) than to jingle lightly like jewels (be flighty).

In archaic times, by attaining the One,

Heaven became clear;

Earth became stable;

spirit became transcendent;

valleys became full;

the ten thousand things became alive;

rulers made the country ordered and secure.

This implies that

If Heaven lacked clarity, it would be divided;

If the Earth lacked stability, it would be shaky;

If spirit lacked transcendence, it would be used up;

If valleys lacked fullness, they would be depleted;

If the ten thousand things lacked life, they would fade away;

and if rulers lacked nobility, they would fall,

and the country would be collapse into chaos.

Therefore, the humble is be root of the noble;

the lowly is the foundation of the high;

rulers call themselves "orphans," "widows," and "worthless."

This is taking the humble and the lowly as the root and foundation,

is it not?

You can have all the parts of a chariot without having a chariot.

Better to rumble like rocks than to tinkle like jade.

Thirty-nine

These things from ancient times arise from one:

The sky is whole and clear.

The earth is whole and firm.

The spirit is whole and strong.

The valley is whole and full.

The ten thousand things are whole and alive.

Kings and lords are whole, and the country is upright.

All these are in virtue of wholeness.

The clarity of the sky prevents its falling.

The firmness of the earth prevents its splitting.

The strength of the spirit prevents its being used up.

The fullness of the valley prevents its running dry.

The growth of the ten thousand things prevents their drying out.

The leadership of kings and lords prevents the downfall of the country.

Therefore
the humble is the root of the noble.

The low is the foundation of the high.

Princes and lords consider themselves "orphaned", "widowed" and "worthless".

Do they not depend on being humble?

Too
much success is not an advantage.

Do not tinkle like jade

Or clatter like stone chimes.

Among the ancient holders of the One:

Heaven that holds the One becomes clear and bright;

Earth that holds the One becomes steady;

Gods that hold the One become efficacious;

Valleys that hold the One become full;

All creatures that hold the One become alive;

Lords and leaders who hold the One become leaders of the human world.

By inference Heaven might split without what makes it clear and bright;

Earth might shake without what makes it steady;

Gods might disappear without what makes them efficacious;

Valleys might go dry without what makes them full;

All creatures might die out without what makes them alive;

Lords and kings might fall without what makes them leaders.

That is why the humble is the root of the noble,

And the high is based on the low.

That is why lords and kings call themselves "the solitary", "the few" and "the unkind".

Does not this take the humble as the root (of the noble)?

Does this not?

Hence the highest honor does not need honoring.

It is better, therefore, to be a hard stone than a beautiful piece of jade.

The things of old that have attained the One:

Heaven, having attained the One, is clear;

Earth, having attained the One, is steady;

Spirits, having attained the One, possess their numinous power;

Valleys, having attained the One, are full;

The ten thousand things, having attained the One, come to life;

Kings and princes, having attained the One, become the model for all under Heaven.

It is by virtue of the One that they become what they are.

Were Heaven not clear by virtue of that,

I fear it would soon shatter;

Were Earth not steady by virtue of that,

I fear it would soon collapse;

Were spirits not to possess their numinous power by virtue of that,

I fear they would soon cease to be;

Were valleys not full by virtue of that,

I fear they would soon dry up;

Were the ten thousand things not to come to life by virtue of that,

I fear they would soon perish;

Were kings and princes not noble and high by virtue of that,

I fear they would soon fall.

Therefore, for the noble the humble is the root;

For the high the low is the foundation.

For this reason, kings and princes

Refer to themselves as "the orphaned one," "the widowed one," and "the ill-provided one."

Isn't this because the humble is the root?

Is it not?

Therefore, if you tally your honors you will count none.

Don't try to jingle like jade-bells,

Rather, sound like rolling rocks.

In antiquity, the person who follows Dao said:

If the sky is harmonised with Dao, it will be clear.

When the Earth harmonises with Dao, it will be settled.

Similarly, the spirits will retain their magic power;

The valley will be filled with water.

When the ruler follows the way of Dao, his reign will be peaceful.

All these are achieved by following the way of Dao.

If the sky is not clear, it will split.

If the Earth is not settled, it will erupt.

When the spirits lose their power, they will become extinct.

The valley without water will dry up.

All forms of life without nourishment will perish.

A ruler who fails to maintain peace will be toppled.

Dignitaries rely on the support from commoners.

A tall building depends entirely on its base to stay erect.

Hence, the rulers customarily use self-deprecating words when referring to themselves.

Is this not an acknowledgement that everything originates from a humble beginning?

Everyone dislikes words like orphaned, widowed, and unworthy.

Yet, the rulers customarily use these terms to describe themselves.

The irony is that if you crave for fame, you will end up losing it.

The person who follows Dao has no desire to be valued like a beautiful jade.

Nor would he like to be rejected as an ugly stone.

Foundation of the Law

Fa Pen

Since antiquity, these have possessed the One -

Heaven in possession of the One has become clear;

Earth in possession of the One has become steady;

Spirits in possession of the One have become divine;

Valleys in possession of the One have become full;

Creatures in possession of the One have become alive;

Kings and nobles in possession of the One have become exemplary.

All the above became what they are in the same way.

Heaven without the One to make it clear

Is apt to crack;

Earth without the One to make it steady

Is apt to quake;

Spirits without the One to make them divine

Are apt to cease operation;

Valleys without the One to make them full

Are apt to become dry;

Creatures without the One to make them alive

Are apt to become extinct;

Kings and nobles without the One to make them exemplary

Are apt to lose their prestige and eminence.

Forsooth, the honorable is rooted in the humble,

And the high is founded on the low.

So kings and nobles call themselves orphaned, lonely, and unworthy.

Does not this indicate that the honorable is rooted in the humble?

Indeed, if a chariot is taken apart,

There will no longer be any chariot.

Desire not to be like polished jade,

But rather to be like rough rocks.

These things have from the beginning attained Unity:

Earth, through Unity, is firm;

Spirits, through Unity, are active;

The Valley, through Unity, is brimming;

All creatures, through Unity, multiply;

Kings and princes, through Unity, govern the world;

Yes: in all these things works Unity.

If Heaven through Unity were not clear, it would be rent;

If Earth through Unity were not firm, it would topple over;

If Spirits through Unity were not active, they would shrivel away;

If the Valley through Unity were not brimming, it would dry up;

If all creatures through Unity did not multiply, they would die out;

If kings and princes through Unity did not govern the world, they would be overthrown.

For nobility has its roots in humility,

And the high is built on a foundation that is low.

Thus kings and princes speak of themselves as "ophans," "the lonely ones," "the unworthy";

In this way they acknowledge that their might is rooted in the lowly? Surely this is so?

For without the component parts of a waggon there is no waggon.

The sages of old sought to be neither the isolated single gem, nor yet the common stone among other stones.

From of old, there are those who reached oneness:

Heaven reached oneness and became clear;

Earth reached oneness and became tranquil;

The spirits reached oneness and became mystic;

The valleys reached oneness and became full;

The ten thousand things reached oneness and became potent;

Barons and kings reached oneness and became sovereign.

Did they not all become so through oneness?

If heaven were not clear,

It probably would crack,

If earth were not tranquil,

It probably would quake.

If spirits were not mystic,

They would probably desist.

If the valleys were not full,

They probably would die out.

If the thousand things were not potent,

They probably would die off.

If barons and kings were not sovereign,

They probably would fall.

Indeed,

The great has its roots in the humble;

The high has its foundations upon the low.

Barons and kings call themselves

The orphaned, the lonely, the unworthy:

Do they not have their roots in the humble?

Truly, the parts of a cart are not the cart.

Do not shine like jade

Or sound like stone chimes.

Since ancient times there have been those who have attained the subtle essence of the universe and thus become what they are.

Heaven attained the subtle essence of the universe and became clear.

Earth attained the subtle essence of the universe and became stable.

Divine spirits attained the subtle essence of the universe and became powerful.

The Valley of the Universe attained the subtle essence of the universe and became productive.

The myriad things attained the subtle essence of the universe and became prosperous.

The sages attained the subtle essence of the universe and became wise.

All became what they are by attaining the subtle essence of the universe and hence their true nature.

Extinction happens to one who violates his true nature.

Without being pure, Heaven would cease to be.

Without being stable, Earth would burst into bits.

Without maintaining their potency, spirits would disperse.

Without being productive, the vast Valley of the Universe would become exhausted.

Without being reproductive, the myriad things would perish.

Without fortifying themselves with integral virtue, sages would stumble and fall.

Greatness is rooted in plainness,

just as the low forms the foundation of the high.

Realizing this, the ancient sovereigns were content to style themselves as desolate, unworthy, and needy.

Therefore, one who does not separate his being from the nature of the universe follows the Integral Way.

He has no wish to sound like jingling jade pendants in order to court a good name,

nor like the rumbling of a stone rolling from a cliff in order to create a bad name.

Each one should work on one's own subtle spiritual integration with the subtle essence of the universe.

XXXIX.

The
Root of Law

Of
old these ones attained to unity:

Heaven
attained it, thereby it is pure,

Earth
attained it, thereby it is steady,

Spirits attained it, thereby they have soul,

Valleys
attained it, thereby they are Idled,

The
myriad things attained it, thereby live,

Princes
and kings, and thereby they became

The
standard of the world, by upright rule,

And
what produced all this is Unity.

Heaven,
but for some source of pureness nothing could maintain,

But
for some source of steadiness Earth would be rent in twain,

Spirits,
but for some source of spirit power, soon would fail,

And
if the vales had not some source, then drouth would soon prevail.

Without
some source of life all living creatures soon would die,

Princes
and kings, by self-esteem alone, would helpless lie,

And
here one sees that noble things are rooted in the base,

That
loftiness, but for the lowly, soon would lose its place;

So
prince and king describe themselves as orphans, lonely men,

As
carriages which have no wheels on which to run again,

Is
not this an acknowledgment that they are rooted in

The
fabric of inferior things, and with the lowly kin?

Enumerate
the different parts which go to make a cart,

Take
it to pieces, and not one will play
a
useful part,

Hence
men do not desire, like gems, to dwell in single state,

Nor
be let drop, like pebble-stones, in masses congregate.

These are they which from of Old have obtained Unity.

Heaven obtained Unity by purity;

he earth obtained Unity by repose;

Spiritual beings obtained Unity by lack of bodily form;

The valleys obtained Unity by fulness;

All beings obtained Unity by life;

Princes and people obtained Unity by being under the rule of Heaven.

These all obtained permanence by Unity.

The innermost of Heaven is purity, if not so, it would be obscured;

The innermost of Earth is repose, it not so, it would disintegrate;

The innermost of spiritual beings is lack of bodily form, if not so, they would die;

The innermost of valleys is fulness of water, if not so, they would be sterile;

The innermost of creatures is life, if not so, they would perish.

The high honour of prince and people is in their being together under the rule of Inner Life, if not so, they would soon lose harmony,

The root of honour is in humility,

The standpoint of high estate is in lowliness.

That is why prince and people call themselves orphans, solitary men, chariots without wheels.

The active principle of their Unity is in lowliness.

Who can deny this?

If you take a chariot to pieces, you have no chariot (it has lost its Unity).

Do not desire to be isolated as a single gem, nor to be lost in a crowd as pebbles on the beach.

There are many things that have achieved Oneness.

The sky achieved Oneness and became clear;

The earth achieved Oneness and became calm;

The spirits achieved Oneness and became charged with powers;

The fountains achieved Oneness and became full;

All of the plants and animals achieved Oneness and became reproductive;

Leaders achieved Oneness and became the greatest rulers of the world.

All of them are what they are by virtue

( the power ) of Oneness.

If the sky were not clear, it would be likely to fall to pieces;

If the earth were not calm, it would be likely to burst into bits;

If the spirits were not charged with powers, they would be likely to cease

from being;

If the fountains were not full, they would be likely to dry up;

If all the plants and animals were not reproductive, they would be likely

to cease to exist;

If the leaders were not the greatest rulers, they would be likely to

stumble and fall.

Truly, humility is the root from which greatness springs,

The High must be built upon the foundation of the low.

That is why leaders describe themselves "The Helpless One," "The Little

One," and "The Worthless One."

To gain the peoples support.

They realize their

dependence upon the lowly.

Get honor

by not being honored.

It is not wise to

shine like jade and

sound like stone-chimes.

(The true leader

has substance

rather just appearance.)

Those who of old attained the Unity (are the following):

Heaven attained unity and became clear.

Earth attained unity and became tranquil.

The spirits attained unity and became animated.

The valleys attained unity and became filled.

The ten thousand things attained unity and were produced.

The feudal kings attained unity and became rectifiers of All-under-heaven.

all this is effected (by unity).

If, by this, heaven were not clear, it is to be feared it might burst.

If, by this, earth were not tranquil, it is to be feared it might quake.

If, by this, the spirits were not animated, it is to be feared they might dissolve.

If, by this, the valleys were not filled, it is to be feared they might be exhausted.

If, by this, the ten thousand things were not produced, it is to be feared they might become extinct.

If, by this, the feudal kings were not noble and exalted, it is to be feared they might trip.

For the noble has the vile as its root; the exalted has the lowly as its base.

Therefore feudal kings call themselves "the Orphan", "the Lonely one", "the Destitute one". Surely this is because they regard the vile as their root!

For supreme honour attained is without honour.

Its desire is not to be finely carved like jade, but to be scattered like gravel.

The things which from of old have got the One (the Tao) are--

Heaven
which by it is bright and pure;

Earth rendered thereby firm and sure;

Spirits with powers by it supplied;

Valleys kept full throughout their void

All creatures which through it do live

Princes and kings who from it get

The model which to all they give.

All
these are the results of the One (Tao).

If
heaven were not thus pure, it soon would rend;

If earth were not thus sure, 'twould break and bend;

Without these powers, the spirits soon would fail;

If not so filled, the drought would parch each vale;

Without that life, creatures would pass away;

Princes and kings, without that moral sway,

However grand and high, would all decay.

Thus
it is that dignity finds its (firm) root in its (previous)

meanness, and what is lofty finds its stability in the lowness (from

which it rises). Hence princes and kings call themselves 'Orphans,'

'Men of small virtue,' and as 'Carriages without a nave.' Is not this

an acknowledgment that in their considering themselves mean they see

the foundation of their dignity? So it is that in the enumeration of

the different parts of a carriage we do not come on what makes it

answer the ends of a carriage. They do not wish to show themselves

elegant-looking as jade, but (prefer) to be coarse-looking as an

(ordinary) stone.

Originally, these attained Wholeness;
Heaven attained Wholeness, and
became 'pure.'
Earth attained Wholeness, and became 'solid.'
The Spirits
attained Wholeness, and became 'divine.'
The Cave Of Impressions attained
Wholeness, and began to fill.
The Hierarchy attained Wholeness, and all was
put 'right.'
Yet,
Karma recoiling upon itself, it implies that;
Once Heaven was 'pure' it would
be torn asunder;
once Earth was 'solid' it would begin to quake;
once
Spirits were 'divine' they would begin to bicker;
once the Cave Of Impressions
filled-up, it would run dry;
once the Hierarchy was 'right' and exalted,
it would 'fall.'
Because
of Karma, it is necessary to be Humbly-Noble;
it is necessary to be Modestly-Exalted.

For
this reason, Hierarchs style themselves as
'orphaned and destitute and hapless.'

Is this not because they have learned true humility?
Therefore,
since striving for great praise deprives one of it,
consequently do not desire
to tinkle like jade
or to ring like the True Stone.

If
you stay with clear awareness

The sky is open, pure and spacious

The earth is firm and friendly too

Activity is efficacious

But
depart from clarity

The purest sky is torn apart

The earth is so divided

Felicity must flee your heart

The
seer knows humility

Doesn't argue or cajole

Doesn't discard anything

Or mutilate the whole

The
seer doesn't show at all

Doesn't sparkle like a jewel

The seer's vast immensity

Is truly less than minuscule

FROM of old there are not lacking things that have attained Oneness.

The sky attained Oneness and became clear;

The earth attained Oneness and became calm;

The spirits attained Oneness and became charged with mystical powers;

The fountains attained Oneness and became full;

The ten thousand creatures attained Oneness and became reproductive;

Barons and princes attained Oneness and became sovereign rulers of the world.

All of them are what they are by virtue of Oneness.

If the sky were not clear, it would be likely to fall to pieces;

If the earth were not calm, it would be likely to burst into bits;

If the spirits were not charged with mystical powers, they would be likely to cease from being;

If the fountains were not full, they would be likely to dry up;

If the ten thousand creatures were not reproductive, they would be likely to come to extinction;

If the barons and princes were not the sovereign rulers, they would be likely to stumble and fall.

Truly, humility is the root from which greatness springs,

And the high must be built upon the foundation of the low.

That is why barons and princes style themselves "The Helpless One," "The Little One," and "The Worthless One."

In the beginning of being, there were those that attained harmony with the Tao.

Heaven attained harmony and became clear.

Earth attained harmony and found peace.

The ancients attained harmony and were replenished.

The valleys attained harmony and became fertile.

All of nature embraced harmony with the Tao and became fruitful.

The ancient Sage-Kings sought harmony with the Tao and became natural leaders.

Without the blessings of the Tao, heaven itself might be riven.

Without the glue of the Tao the Earth might shake apart.

Without the guiding of the Tao mankind's spirit becomes confused, and disharmonious.

If the blessings of the Tao were withheld the valleys would become parched and barren,

Nature would be reduced to meager remnants and finally disappear,

And the leaders would become corrupt and strive to bring conflict and war to nations.

Therefore; humility is the root and treasure of the great,

And all great things are built on the foundation of the lowly.

It is for this reason that the truly great think of themselves as 'unworthy', 'abased' and 'low', for are these not the root of humility?

Count and describe the parts of a chariot, but without being whole what is its use?

Don't glitter like jade, keep your riches in your heart, while retaining an outward appearance as simple and rugged as a common stone.

The masters of old attained unity with the Tao.

Heaven attained unity and became pure.

The earth attained unity and found peace.

The spirits attained unity so they could minister.

The valleys attained unity that they might be full.

Humanity attained unity that they might flourish.

Their leaders attained unity that they might set the example.

This is the power of unity.

Without
unity, the sky becomes filthy.

Without unity, the earth becomes unstable.

Without unity, the spirits become unresponsive and disappear.

Without unity, the valleys become dry as a desert.

Without unity, human kind can't reproduce and becomes extinct.

Without unity, our leaders become corrupt and fall.

The
great view the small as their source,

and the high takes the low as their foundation.

Their greatest asset becomes their humility.

They speak of themselves as orphans and widows,

thus they truly seek humility.

Do not shine like the precious gem,

but be as dull as a common stone.

Natural events are potent because they act in accordance with how things work. They simply are.

Study natural processes: the light in the sky, the gravity of earth, the unfolding of your own ideas and insights, the emptiness of space, the fullness of life, and the behaviour of saints.

Imagine what would happen if these processes were neurotic and self-centered: a lazy sky flickers; gravity varies from moment to moment; your mind is irrational; space is agitated; life is abortive; the saints are worthless models. Nothing works.

The wise leader knows better than to be neurotic and self-centered. Potency comes from knowing what is happening and acting accordingly. Paradoxically, freedom comes from obedience to the natural order.

Since all creation is a whole, separateness is an illusion. Like it or not, we are team players. Power comes through cooperation, independence through service, and a greater self through selflessness.

People of ancient times possessed oneness.

The sky attained oneness and so became clear.

Earth attained oneness and so found peace.

The Spirit attains oneness and so is replenished.

The Valleys attained oneness and so became full.

All things attain oneness and they flourish.

The ancient leaders attained oneness

And so becme examples for All the world.

All of this is achieved by oneness.

Without oneness, the sky would crack

The Earth explode

The Spirit exhaust

The valley deplete

Leaders would certainly fall

And All life, perish.

Therefore the Great recognizes the Smal as its root.

The High takes the Low as its foundation.

Leaders refer to themselves as orphans and widows.

Is this not grounding oneself in humility? Therefore the highest renown

is no renown.

We do not want to glitter like jewels.

We do not want to be hard as stone.

All
things are at one with Infinity.

When
humanity is centered in this oneness:

the
sky remains clear and beautiful,

the earth remains pure and sustains life,

the spirit of humanity is in harmony,

the valley is the source of abundance,

all creatures reproduce, regenerate and

replenish the earth,

leaders and kings are in harmony

and nations are at peace.

When
humanity focuses on the manifestations of

Infinity,

distinguishes and judges all things

and thereby forgets the oneness of Infinity:

the
sky becomes cloudy with pollution,

the earth becomes a cesspool

unable to easily neutralize the many

poisons,

the spirit of humanity becomes confused

and accepts conflict as the nature of

humanity,

the valley no longer produces abundance

and what it does produce is tainted.

Leaders and kings take their nations to war

in order to control the untainted

lands,

creatures no longer reproduce, species die

out

and parts of the earth, unattended by

the myriad creatures, no longer

regenerate or replenish themselves,

the people of all nations live in conflict,

fear, hunger and depression.

Therefore,
never forget that oneness is the

essence of harmony; the simple is the way of

peace.

Leaders
and kings consider themselves, alone,

ridiculed

and misunderstood when they forget their

oneness with Infinity.

In
confusion, they inevitably lead their nations to

war.

In
order to maintain peace and harmony in the land,

they must flow in the peace and harmony

of the oneness of all things.

Too
much success is a sign that one has

begun to focus on manifestations and

not on Infinity, the essence of all

manifestations.

Do
not distinguish precious jade.

Remain centered in the peace and harmony

of the oneness of all things.

Previously, things must have been as One.

Heaven must have been One to be Clear.

Earth must have been One to be Calm.

Spirits must have been One to be Alert.

Valleys must have been One to be Full.

All things must have been One to be Alive.

The Monarch must have been One to serve under Heaven.

For;

Heavens not Clear would split,

Earth not Calm would crack,

Spirits not Alert would cease,

Valleys not Full would deplete,

Without Life, all things would expire,

A Monarch not highly regarded would be deposed.

For the Humble are the basis of the High,

the Inferior are the foundation of the Superior.

Thus does the Monarch regard himself as Orphaned, Widowed, and Unlucky.

Can Humility be the source of the problem ?

Better to count a carriage as no carriage,

and lie low like Rocks, rather than shine like Jade.

These are the things of ancient times which obtained the One:1

Heaven obtained the One and became clear;

Earth obtained the One and became stable;

The Gods obtained the One and became divine;

The Valleys obtained the One and became full;

The Ten Thousand Things obtained the One and were made alive;

Kings and lords obtained the One and ruled the empire.

Did they not all become as they are by obtaining the One?

Without clarity,

Heaven would soon shatter.

Without stability,

the Earth would soon split.

Without being divine,

the Gods would soon dissolve.

Without being full,

the Valleys would soon be exhausted.

Without life,

the Ten Thousand Things would soon

perish.

Without kings and lords,

the empire would soon fall.

Therefore the noble has its root in the humble.

The high has its foundation in the low.

This is why kings and lords call themselves orphaned, lonely, and without sustenance.

Thus they regard the humble as their root.

Those who are most praiseworthy

Do not need praise.

They prefer neither to be rare, like jade,

Nor common, like stone.

1. i.e. the Tao.

Achievement of oneness in the past includes:

The heaven that became clear,

The earth that became peaceful,

The soul that became sensitive,

And kings that became the world's leaders.

The following can be inferred:

The heaven will break

If it can by no means clear up;

The earth will be wasteland

If it can by no means be peaceful;

The soul will die out

If it can by no means be sensitive;

And kings will go rampant

If they can by no means lead the world.

Therefore,

Nobility is rooted in the ordinary people,

And the high is based on the low.

The kings take names

Like "the Isolated," "the Helpless," or "the Wicked,"

Just because they appreciate their roots and bases.

Therefore,

The most glorious does not seek after glory,

And the wisest does not seek to be the beautiful jade

But the unrefined rough rock.

Those that of old got The One Thing: The sky got The One Thing, and by this became clear. The earth got The One Thing, and by this became steady. The spirits got The One Thing, and by this obtained their powers.

The rivers got The One Thing, and by this became full. The thousands of things got The One Thing, and by this came to life. The princes and kings got The One Thing, and by this became the Standard for the World. This is how things came about.

The sky, without what makes it clear, is likely to crack. The earth, without what makes it steady, is likely to quake. The spirits, without what gives them powers, are likely to vanish.

The rivers, without what makes them full are likely to dry up. The thousands of things, without what gives them life, are likely to perish. The princes and kings, without what makes them eminent and noble, are likely to fall.

Yes, the eminent takes the common and ignored as a root the noble takes the lowly as a foundation.

And so, the princes and kings call themselves 'the orphan ... ,' 'the poor ... ,' 'the destitute ... is this not using the common and ignored as a root Is it not so?

Yes, enumerate the carriage parts - still not a carriage.

He doesn't wish to glitter and glitter like jade he falls like a stone, falling into oblivion.

There are Those living in Unity with Tao since ancient time. Thanks to Them — the sky is pure and the earth is stable, the nature is gentle and the rivers are full of water, the valleys are covered with flowers, all living beings multiply, the heroes of the spiritual Path are paragons of virtue. All this is provided by Those achieved the Unity!

If there was no Their help, then the sky would cease to be pure, the earth would crack all over, the nature would cease giving its beauty to all the living; the valleys would stop blooming and turn into desert; the living beings would stop multiplying and disappear; the heroes of the spiritual Path would not be paragons of virtue and would be ridiculed and banished...

People are a base for their rulers. Therefore, those earthly rulers who elevate themselves do not have a strong base. This happens because they do not consider people as their base. It is their mistake.

If one disassembles the chariot which he rides — what would he be left with?

Do not consider yourself precious jasper! Be simple — as common stone!

Being in harmony with the Tao way

The sky obtained clarity and the earth became stable.

In harmony things were gradually created.

Out
of the Tao way the man is not in harmony with the sky

He is not stable on the earth.

Without this equilibrium, the man disappears.

The
Wise Person sees everything in equilibrium,

He doesn't manifest his Ego, or intervene.

First he will monitor the Tao Way,

Uniting with the Tao Way, he is in equilibrium as well.

Of
those in ancient times who attained unity: Heaven attained unity in order to
be pure. Earth attained unity in order to be stable. Spirits attained unity
in order to be responsive. The valleys attained unity in order to be full. The
myriad creatures attained unity in order to reproduce. The lords and kings attained
unity in order to become the correct ones in the world. [It is unity that] brings
them to this height. If Heaven did not have what it takes to be pure, it would
probably become rent. If Earth did not have the means to be stable, it would
probably quake. If the spirits did not have the means to be responsive, they
would probably dissipate. If the valleys did not have the means to be filled,
they would probably become exhausted. If the myriad creatures did not have the
means to reproduce, they would probably become extinct. If the lords and kings
did not have the means to be noble and exalted, they would probably fall. So
the noble takes the ignoble as its base, and the high takes the low as its foundation.
For this reason the lords and kings speak of themselves as the orphaned, the
bereaved, and the unworthy. Is this not taking the ignoble as one's base? Is
this not so? So the highest degree of good repute is to have no good repute.
Be not glistening like jade [but] stony like rock.

Those of ancient times obtained the One:

Heaven obtained the One for its clarity;

Earth obtained the One for its tranquility;

The Spirit obtained the One for its divinity;

The Valley obtained the One for its repletion;

All things obtained the One for their lives;

Dukes and kings obtained the One for the rectitude of the world.

What causes these is the One.

Without clarity, Heaven could not avoid disrupting.

Without tranquility, Earth could not avoid explosion.

Without divinity, The Spirit could not avoid dissolving.

Without repletion, The Valley could not avoid dissipating.

Without life, All things could not avoid perishing.

Without rectitude and dignity, Dukes and kings could not avoid falling.

Therefore, distinction has humility as its root;

The high regards the low as its foundation.

Therefore dukes and kings call themselves

Orphans, widowers, and starvers.

Does this not mean regarding humility as a base?

Doesn't it?

He who is most praise-worthy

Does not need any praise.

He prefers to be neither rare as jade,

Nor as common as rocks.

Oneness in Leadership

From old, these may have harmony with the One:

Heaven in harmony with the One becomes clear.

Earth in harmony with the One becomes stable.

Mind in harmony with the One becomes inspired.

Valleys in harmony wiht the One become full.

All Things in harmony with the One becomes creawtive.

Leaders in harmony with the One becomes incorruptible in the world.

These were attained through Oneness.

Heaven without clarity would probably crack.

Earth without stability would probably quake.

Mind without inspiration would probably sleep.

Valleys without fullness would probably dry up.

All Things without creativity would probably die off.

Leaders without incorruptible ways would probably stumble and fall.

Indeed, the high-placed stem from teh humble;

The elevated are based upon the lowly.

This is why leaders call themselves

Alone, lonely, and unfavored.

Is this not because they stem form the humble and common?

Is it not?

Therefore, attain honor without being honored.

Do not desire to shine like jade; wear ornaments as if they were stone.

The lake is peaceful and clear. Jump into it and the water ripples, muck stirs, fish scatter. Step lightly into it and all will remain. Have compassion and practice modesty.

These things in ancient times received the One:

The
sky obtained it and was clarified;

The earth received it and was settled firm;

The spirits got it and were energized;

The valleys had it, filled to overflow;

All things, as they partook it came alive;

The nobles and the king imbibed the One

In order that the realm might upright be;

Such things were then accomplished by the One.

Without
its clarity the sky might break;

Except it were set firm, the earth might shake;

Without their energy the gods would pass;

Unless kept full, the valleys might go dry;

Except for life, all things would pass away;

Unless the One did lift and hold them high,

The nobles and the king might trip and fall.

The
humble folk support the mighty ones;

They are base on which the highest rest.

The nobles and the king speak of themselves

As "orphans," "desolate" and "needy ones."

Does this not indicate that they depend

Upon the lowly people for support?

Truly
a cart is more than the sum of its parts.

Better
to rumble like rocks

Than to tinkle like jade.

From of old those that attained one principle (Tao)-

Heaven attained the One and became clear,

Earth attained the One and became tranquil,

Spirits attained the One and became divine,

Valleys attained the One and became full,

All things attained the One and became luxuriant,

Kings and princes attained the One and became heads of the kingdom.

What they strove to achieve was fulfilled by the principle (the One).

If Heaven couldn't have become clear it would soon crack.

If Earth couldn't have become tranquil it would soon be shaken.

If spirits couldn't have become divine they would soon perish.

If valleys couldn't have become luxuriant they would soon be extinct.

If kings and princes couldn't have maintained their majesty and nobility they would soon lose their kingdoms and states.

Therefore the noble takes the humble as it root,

And the high takes the low as its ground.

Just for this reason kings and princes call themselves the orphaned, the solitary and the unworthy.

Is it not regarding the humble as the root of the noble?

Is it not so?

Therefore to seek too much honour means to lose honour wholly.

So neither the noble jade, nor the humble rocks should one strive to be.

As for those who obtained the One long, long ago,

Heaven is pure by having obtained the One;

Earth is stable by having obtained the One;

the gods have their spiritual power by having obtained the One;

valleys can be filled by having obtained the One;

the myriad things live by having obtained the One;

lords and princes provide constancy to all under Heaven by having obtained the One.

This is how they attain to these states.

If Heaven had not this means to be pure, it would, we fear, deteriorate.

If Earth had not this means to be stable, it would, we fear, disintegrate.

If the gods had not this means to have spiritual power, they would, we fear, terminate.

If valleys had not this means to achieve fullness, they would, we fear, dry up.

If the myriad things had not this means to live, they would, we fear, expire.

If lords and princes did not have this means to achieve loftiness and nobility, they would, we fear, collapse.

Thus it is that nobility uses humility as its roots and loftiness uses lowliness as its foundation.

This is why lords and princes refer to themselves as "the orphan," "the widower," or "the unworthy."

Is this not using humility as the roots?

Is this not so?

Therefore the ultimate number of praises amounts to no praise, so one wants neither "he glows with luster like the jade" nor "he is as hard as hard can be like the stone."

1. Of those in the past that attained the One—

2. Heaven, by attaining the One became clear;

3. Earth, by attaining the One became stable;

4. Gods, by attaining the One became divine;

5. Valley, by attaining the One became full;

6. Marquises and kings, by attaining the One made the whole land ordered and
secure.

7.
Taking this to its logical conclusion we would say—

8. If Heaven were not by means of it clear, it would, I'm afraid, shatter;

9. If the Earth were not by means of it stable, it would, I'm afraid, let go.

10. If the gods were not by means of it divine, they would, I'm afraid, be powerless.

11. If valley were not by means of it full, they would, [I'm afraid,] dry up.

12. And if marquises and kings were not by means of it noble and high, they
would, I'm afraid, topple and fall.

13.
Therefore, it must be the case that the noble has the base as its root;

14. And it must be the case that the high has the low for its foundation.

15. Thus, for this reason, marquises and kings call themselves "The Orphan,"
"The Widower," and "The One Without Grain."

16. This is taking the base as one's root, is it not?!

17.
Therefore, they regard their large numbers of carriages as having no carriage.

18. And because of this, they desire not to dazzle and glitter like jade,

19. But to remain firm and strong like stone.

Since time began,

this is what it's meant

to be in touch with Tao:

Tao made the
heavens clear.

Tao made the earth solid.

Tao made our spirits strong.

Tao made the valleys fertile.

Tao gave all living things life.

Tao gave rulers authority.

Without Tao,

the heavens would collapse.

Without Tao,

the earth would crumble.

Without Tao,

our spirits would fade away.

Without Tao,

the valleys would dry up.

Without Tao,

all life would become extinct.

Without Tao,

rulers would stumble and fall.

Humility gives
us power.

Our leaders should think of themselves

as insignificant, powerless,

unworthy of their stature.

Isn't that what humility is all about?

Be strong,

but pay no attention to hollow praise.

Don't call attention to yourself.

Don't make a scene.

Oneness

The ancients attained oneness.

Heaven attained oneness and became clear.

Earth attained oneness and became stable.

Spirits attained oneness and became divine.

The valleys attained oneness and became fertile.

Creatures attained oneness and lived and grew.

Kings and nobles attained oneness and became leaders.

What made them so is oneness.

Without clarity, heaven would crack.

Without stability, the earth would quake.

Without divinity, spirits would dissipate.

Without fertility, the valleys would be barren.

Without life and growth, creatures would die off.

Without leadership, kings and nobles would fall.

Therefore humility is the basis for nobility,

and the low is the basis for the high.

Thus kings and nobles call themselves

orphans, lonely, and unworthy.

Do they not depend upon the common people for support?

Dismantle the parts of a chariot, and there is no chariot.

Rather than tinkle like jade, rumble like rocks.

All living things live by the Light of Oneness.

From it heaven receives its brightness earth its stability mind its insight space its fullness life its fertility and the leader his model.

If the Light of Oneness did not blaze in everything heaven would lose its brightness earth its stability mind its insight space its fullness life its fertility and the leader his model.

That is why the Sage lives consciously by the Light of Oneness like the crown of the tree out of the root.

That is why the leaders call themselves servants of the people remembering the onefoldness of the One guided by the spirit of Oneness.

The Power of The Tao

Lao Tze says,

Old things which have the correctness are:

It is by correctness that

the Heaven becomes bright and pure, and the Earth firm and sure;

the spirits divine;

the valleys full;

all existence lively;

and the kings just for the world's model.

All these are the results of correctness.

If the Heaven were not so pure, it would soon rend.

If the Earth were not so sure, it would break and bend.

If the spirits were not so divine, they would lose their prophesy.

If the valleys were not so full, they would parch.

If all existence were not so lively, they would be extinct.

If the kings had no morality, they would collapse from their throne.

Therefore, dignity finds root in meanness, and the lofty find their stability in lowness.

Therefore, the kings self-styled themselves by the solitary, the unworthy, and the virtueless.

Didn't these mean that dignity finds its root in its meanness?

Didn't these?

So, when we analyze a cart's construction, we can't find a part named cart.

As for me, I would neither appreciate being regarded as a jade rare and expensive, nor as a stone popular and cheap.

SUFFICIENCY AND QUIETNESS

From
the principle which is called the Tao,

the sky, the earth, and creativity are one,

the sky is clear, the earth is firm,

and the spirit of the inner world is full.

When
the ruler of the land is whole,

the nation too is strong, alive and well,

and the people have sufficient

to meet their earthly needs.

When
the daytime sky is dark

and overcast like night,

the nation and its people

will surely suffer much.

The
firmness of the dew filled earth

gives it its life;

the energy of the inner world

prevents its becoming drained of strength;

its fullness prevents it running dry.

The growth of all things

prevents their dying.

The
work of the leader should ensure

the prosperity of the populace.

So it is said,

"humility is the root

of great nobility;

the low forms a foundation

for the great;

and princes consider themselves

to be of little worth".

Each depends on humility therefore;

it is of no advantage to have too much success,

so do not sound loudly like jade bells,

nor clatter like stone chimes.

In harmony with the Tao,

the sky is clear and spacious,

the earth is solid and full,

all creature flourish together,

content with the way they are,

endlessly repeating themselves,

endlessly renewed.

When man interferes with the Tao,

the sky becomes filthy,

the earth becomes depleted,

the equilibrium crumbles,

creatures become extinct.

The Master views the parts with compassion,

because he understands the whole.

His constant practice is humility.

He doesn't glitter like a jewel

but lets himself be shaped by the Tao,

as rugged and common as stone.

Since the beginning of Heaven and Earth, there were things attaining balance:

through attaining balance, Heavens equilibrated;

through attaining balance, the Earth became secure;

through attaining balance, minds became calm;

through attaining balance, valleys became capacious;

through attaining balance, All Things became productive;

through attaining balance, rulers achieved justice throughout the world.

Were the heavens are not equilibrated, they might collapse;

were the Earth not secure, it might quake to bits;

were minds not calm, they might be disrupted;

were valleys not capacious, they might dry up;

were All Things non-productive, they might become extinct;

were rulers not obtaining justice throughout the world, they might fall.

Hence, the rulers established the rule based on the ruled;

and the highness was built upon the foundation of the lowness.

When rulers called themselves "orphans", "widows" and "indigents" reminds that they established the rule according to the needs of the ruled.

Did they not?

Thus frequent flattery becomes no flattery.

Therefore, a perfect gentleman has no excessive desires:

He is smooth like smooth jade!

He is solid like solid rock!

Those from the past have attained Oneness.

By attaining Oneness, heaven is clear.

By attaining Oneness, earth is at peace.

By attaining Oneness, the spirit is quickened.

By attaining Oneness, the valley is filled.

By attaining Oneness, the king puts order in the whole world.

All these result from Oneness.

Without its clarity, heaven is liable to explode.

Without its peace, earth is liable to erupt.

Without its quickening, the spirit is liable to die out.

Without its fullness, valleys are liable to dry out.

Without proper esteem, the king is liable to fall.

Esteem is rooted in the humble.

The high is founded upon the low.

This is why the lords and rulers call themselves widows and orphans without support.

Is this is not the root of being humble?

Much praise amounts to no praise.

Without preference, Being is as resonant as Jade and as gravelly as stone.

XXXIX

It
is said that by attaining the one, long ago

Heaven rose and opened above us

As the earth took root and became solid

Gods walked the land in their glory

As the valleys poured forth all forms of life to honor them

And so leaders, attaining the one, would make their people prosperous and orderly

If,
then, the way were ever truly lost

Heaven would close and fall, and the earth crumble

Gods would fade away and the valleys go barren

And leaders would fall amidst chaos and despair

What
is noble must be rooted in the crude

What is high must be settled on the low

This is why leaders speak more often of the unfortunate than the fortunate

They would ground themselves among the lowly to reach high

Though they have cars, they would rather walk among the people

Though they could shine like jewels, they would rather seem solid as old stone

Ancient Attainment of Unity

When unity was attained of old,

heaven became clear by attaining unity,

earth became steady by attaining unity,

spirit was quickened by attaining unity,

valley streams were filled by attaining unity,

all beings were born by attaining unity;

and by attaining unity lords acted rightly

for the sake of the world.

What brought this about was unity:

without means of clarity, heaven may burst;

without means of steadiness, earth may erupt;

without means of quickening, spirit may be exhausted;

without means of filling, valley streams may dry up;

without means of birth, all beings may perish;

without means of acting rightly, lords may stumble.

Therefore nobility is rooted in humility,

loftiness is based on lowliness.

This is why noble people refer to themselves

as alone, lacking, and unworthy.

Is this not being rooted in humility?

So there is no praise in repeated praise;

they don't want to be like jewels or like stones.

Previously those who have integrity are as follows:

Heaven has integrity, so it is clear.

Earth has integrity, so it is peaceful.

Gods have integrity, so they are responsive.

Valleys have integrity, so they are full.

All living creatures have integrity, so they can live.

Kings and lords have integrity, so they can govern normally.

Why is it so?

If Heaven is not clear, it could split.

If Earth is not peaceful, it could collapse.

If Gods are not responsive, nobody would worship.

If valleys are not full, they could be depleted.

If living creatures cannot live, they would become extinct.

If Kings and lords cannot govern normally, they would fall.

Therefore, humbleness is the root from which nobleness grows.

Low is the foundation on which high is built.

It is because of this, kings and lord call themselves lonely persons, friendless persons, and worthless persons.

This is for the sake of being humble, is it not?

The extremely honorable is the one without being honored.

They do not want to be like glittering jades, but like solid rocks.

In the remote past there were those who attained the One.

Attaining the One, heaven is clear.

Attaining the One, earth is calm.

Attaining the One, God is holy.

Attaining the One, the cave is full.

Attaining the One, ten thousand creatures come into life.

Attaining the One, kings and princes become sovereign rulers of the world.

All of them are what they are by virtue of the one.

If heaven were not clear, it would fall to pieces.

If earth were not calm, it would quake.

If God were not holy, he would cease from being.

If the fountain were not full, it would dry up.

If ten thousand creatures did not come to life, they would perish.

If kings and princes were not supreme, they would stumble and fall.

Hence, humility is the root of greatness.

The high is built upon the foundation of the low.

That is why kings and princes style themselves "the solitary one," "the little one," and "the worthless one".

Is this not enough to prove that humility serves as root?

Therefore extreme honor means no honor.

Do not wish to shine like jade and be aloof like stone.

Those who were
the only one
(whole, individual).

Only one Tien (sky), thus it could be clear.

Only one Di (earth), thus peaceful.

Only one spirit, thus having magic.

Valley is one (whole), it could hold water.

Every creature is one (individual), it has life.

Only one king, the world respects him.

Tien not clear, could crack.

Di not peaceful, could quake.

Spirit without magic, could exhaust.

Valley could not hold water, could dry up.

Every creature has no life, could extinct.

King is not high and mighty, could fall.

The low is the foundation of the high.

The humble is the root of the noble.

King considers himself, the Only, the only One, the worthless.

Do the king is truly lowly in essence? No!

To much (success, fame,...) is not ....

Do not tinkle like jade,

clatter like stone.

From ancient times these things have arisen from the One:

Heaven
is clear because of the One,

The earth is firm because of the One,

The Spirit is strong because of the One,

The valley is full because of thc One,

The ten thousand things reprodnce because of the One,

Leaders are able to lead because of the One.

All
of this comes from the One.

If
heaven were not clear it would soon split.

If the earth were not firm it would soon bend and break.

If the Spirit were not strong it would soon wear out.

If the valley were not full it would soon dry up.

If the ten thousand things did not reproduce

they would soon die out.

If leaders could not lead they would soon fall.

Therefore,
greatness has its source in the little.

The low is the foundation of the high.

Princes
call themselves "alone," "helpless," "worthless."

Is this not acknowledging a humble root~

Enumerate
the parts of a carriage

and you have not defined a carriage.

Better
to resound like stone chimes

than to tinkle like jade bells.

There
are old things that have understood the unity of all ...

the sky is one and clear

the earth is one and solid

beauty is strong

space is one and empty

plants and animals reproduce

politicians and priests govern their people

... all because they are one with the way.

Clearness keeps the sky from falling

solidness keeps the earth from crumbling

meaning allows for beauty

emptiness allows for space and time

sex creates being

people create governments and honor and stability.

Humility
is the root of greatness.

The low is the foundation of the high.

That's why politicians and priests make sure that

everybody knows they came from underprivileged families.

A simple case of basing political gain upon humble beginnings.

A
list of parts still cannot explain the whole

the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

Why sound like bells when others sound like chimes?

Why sound at all?

There were those in old times who grasped and were possessed of the one:

The heaven was much clarified by attaining it.

Likewise, the earth got stable or calm by the same [rotating] measure; and demon
spirits or gods were spiritualised, became divine.

The valley likewise became full, the abyss replenished.

By staying in the one, all creatures lived and grew.

By staying in some basic unity, [Russian] princes and dukes became the ennobled
of the people - That was how each became so.

Barons
and princes direct their people [in some ways]. It's some inner fabric of unified
wholeness that sees to it.

[Man-felt] heaven could soon split open without fundamental clarity. Without
basic clarity, heavens might become torn.

Without resting, steady stability, the earth might quake and tip over.

Without spiritual power, the gods might wither and crumble,

Without being filled, the valleys might crack and run dry.

If the myriad things had not thus lived and grown all would end without the
life-giving sustenance of power. Without the ennobling power, the honourable
kings and barons in high places, even the directors of their people, might stumble,
some overthrown.

So
the humble is the stem upon which the mighty grows. Yes, humble oneness is the
basis for all honour. So even the exalted ones depend upon the lowly for their
base. That could be [one reason] why [Russian] princes and dukes call themselves
the orphaned," the lonely one," the unworthy," or the truly ill-provided. Is
it not true then that they [to some extent] depend upon common man for support,
or on hard ruler might rooting itself upon humility?

Just
enumerate all the parts of a chariot. and you still have no [unified construct,
no] chariot

So [learn to] rumble like rocks rather than jingle like jade.

In olden times, these attained unity:

Heaven attained unity, and thereby became pure.

Earth attained unity, and thereby became tranquil.

The spirits attained unity, and thereby became divine.

The valley attained unity, and thereby became full.

Feudal lords and kings attained unity, and thereby all was put right.

Yet, pushed to the extreme,

It implies that,

If heaven were ever pure, it would be likely to rend.

It implies that,

If earth were ever tranquil, it would be likely to quake.

It implies that,

If the spirits were ever divine, they would be likely to dissipate.

It implies that,

If the valley were ever full, it would be likely to run dry.

It implies that,

If feudal lords and kings were ever noble and thereby exalted, they would be likely to fall.

Therefore,

It is necessary to be noble, and yet take humility as a basis.

It is necessary to be exalted, and yet take modesty as a foundation.

Now, for this reason,

Feudal lords and kings style themselves

"orphaned," "destitute," and "hapless."

Is this not because they take humility as their basis?

Therefore,

Striving for an excess of praise, one ends up without praise.

Consequently,

Desire not to be jingling as jade nor stolid as stone.

Certain things have, by unity, lasted from most ancient times, namely:-

The transparency of Heaven;

The steadfastness of Earth;

The incorporeality of spirits;

The watery plenitude of valleys;

The life of all creations;

The government of kings and princes;

All these endure by unity.

But for the cause of its transparency Heaven would be in danger of obscuration.

But for the cause of its steadfastness the Earth would be in danger of disintegration.

But for the cause of their incorporeality spirits would be in danger of decease.

But for the cause of their plenitude the valleys would be in danger of sterility.

But for the cause of their vitality all creation would be in danger of destruction.

But for the cause of their honour and greatness princes and kings would be in danger of an overthrow.

Herein we see how honour is derived from that which is without distinction; and how greatness rests upon, and is sustained by, that which is insignificant.

Hence do princes and kings call themselves "orphans," "solitary men," and "chariots without wheels."

Do they not thereby acknowledge their authority to be vested in, and supported by, their superiors?

Who can deny it?

Surely "a chariot without wheels" is no chariot at all!

It is as hard for a man to be isolated like a single gem as to be lost in the crowd like a common pebble.

A Shining Jewel

The wonders of the Tao—-

the nighttime sky,

the dancing waters,

the forests full of life,

need no improvement.

Your beloved's life is precious,

a natural wonder,

a shining jewel.

Don't tamper with it.

It does not need polishing,

improving,

or correcting.

Neither do you.

Don't bring yourselves the misery

of, ''If only he'd . . ."

or, "She needs to . . ."

or, "Why don't I . . ."

Delight in what you are right now

and you will both have room to become

everything that you can be.

Of old those that obtained the One: Heaven obtained the One and became
clear. Earth obtained the One and became tranquil. The spiritual beings
obtained the One and became divine.

The valley obtained the One and became full. The myriad things
obtained the One and lived and grew. Kings and barons obtained the One
and became rulers of the empire. What made them so is the One.

If heaven had not thus become clear, It would soon crack. If the earth
had not thus become tranquil, It would soon be shaken. If the spiritual
beings had not thus become divine, They would soon wither away.

If the valley had not thus become full, It would soon become
exhausted. If the myriad things had not thus lived and grown, They would
soon become extinct. If kings and barons had not thus become honourable
and high in position, They would soon fall.

Therefore humble station is the basis of honour. The low is the foundation of the high.

For this reason kings and barons call themselves children without
parents, lonely people without spouses, and men without food to eat. Is
this not regarding humble station as the basis of honour? Is it not?

Therefore enumerate all the parts of a chariot as you may, and you still have no chariot.

Rather than jingle like the jade, Rumble like the rocks.

The wholeness
of life has, from of old, been made manifest in its parts:

Clarity has been made manifest in heaven,

Firmness in earth,

Purity in the spirit,

In the valley conception,

In the river procreation;

And so in a leader ate the people made manifest

For wholeness of use.

But for clarity heaven would be veiled,

But for firmness earth would have crumbled,

But for purity spirit would have fumbled,

But for conception the valley would have failed,

But for procreation the river have run dry;

So, save for the people, a leader shall die:

Always the low carry the high

On a root for growing by.

What can stand lofty with no low foundation?

No wonder leaders of a land profess

Their stature and their station

To be servitude and lowliness!

If rim and spoke and hub were not,

Where would be the chariot?

Who will prefer the jingle of jade pendants if

He once has heard stone growing in a cliff!

From the beginning, everything has needed to become natural and harmonic, which is called ONE.

When the sky becomes ONE, it is clear;

When the earth becomes ONE, it is peaceful;

When the spirits become ONE, they grant all wishes;

When the riverbeds and valleys become ONE, they fill with water;

When all living things become ONE, they grow;

When the kings become ONE, they can govern their countries.

This is because of the DAO.

If the sky is not clear, it will collapse;

If the earth is not peaceful, it will explode;

If spirits cannot grant wishes, they will disappear;

If all living things cannot grow, they will die;

If kings cannot govern their countries, they will be overthrown.

Therefore, the cheap is the base of the noble; the low is the foundation of the high.

So the kings always called themselves bad names like the single, the widower, and the unkind.

Is this proof that the cheap is the base of the noble? Is it not?

Therefore, pursuing fame will get you no fame.

Do not be like a beautiful jade; be instead like a plain stone.

In ancient times, these attained wholeness:

Heaven attained wholeness and thereby became pure.

Earth attained wholeness and thereby became tranquil.

Spirits attained wholeness and thereby became divine.

Valleys attained wholeness and thereby became full.

Beings attained wholeness and thereby became alive.

Leaders attained wholeness and thereby all was put aright.

Everything is what it is by virtue of its wholeness.

Heaven without purity would rend.

Earth without tranquility would collapse.

Spirits without divinity would dissipate.

Valleys without fullness would desiccate.

Beings without aliveness would perish.

Leaders without magnanimity would fall.

Humility is the basis of magnanimity.

Modesty is the fundament of exaltation.

Those in high position call themselves powerless, unworthy, or destitute.

Is this not because they take humility as the basis of magnanimity?

There is no honor in displaying your honor.

Desire not either to be jingling like jade or to be stolid like stone.

Achievement of oneness in the past includes:

The heaven that became clear,

The earth that became peaceful,

The soul that became sensitive,

And kings that became the world's leaders.

The following can be inferred:

The heaven will break

If it can by no means clear up;

The earth will be wasteland

If it can by no means be peaceful;

The soul will die out

If it can by no means be sensitive;

And kings will go rampant

If they can by no means lead the world.

Therefore,

Nobility is rooted in the ordinary people,

And the high is based on the low.

The kings take names

Like "the Isolated," "the Helpless," or "the Wicked,"

Just because they appreciate their roots and bases.

Therefore,

The most glorious does not seek after glory,

And the wisest does not seek to be the beautiful jade

But the unrefined rough rock.

In the beginning of being, there were those that attained harmony with the Tao.

Heaven attained harmony and became clear.

Earth attained harmony and found peace.

The ancients attained harmony and were replenished.

The valleys attained harmony and became fertile.

All of nature embraced harmony with the Tao and became fruitful.

The ancient Sage-Kings sought harmony with the Tao and became natural leaders.

Without the blessings of the Tao, heaven itself might be riven.

Without the glue of the Tao the Earth might shake apart.

Without the guiding of the Tao mankind's spirit becomes confused, and disharmonious.

If the blessings of the Tao were withheld the valleys would become parched and barren,

Nature would be reduced to meager remnants and finally disappear,

And the leaders would become corrupt and strive to bring conflict and war to nations.

Therefore; humility is the root and treasure of the great,

And all great things are built on the foundation of the lowly.

It is for this reason that the truly great think of themselves as 'unworthy', 'abased' and 'low', for are these not the root of humility?

Count and describe the parts of a chariot, but without being whole what is its use?

Don't glitter like jade, keep your riches in your heart, while retaining an outward appearance as simple and rugged as a common stone.

