===== Chapter 18 =====

When the great Tao is abandoned

There exists humaneness and righteousness.

When intelligence and wit go forth

There exists greatness and deception.

When the six familial relationships are not in harmony

There exists obedience and charity.

When kingdoms and households are in darkness and chaos

There exists loyalty and subjugation.

Great Tao rejected: Benevolence and righteousness appear.

Learning and knowledge professed: Great Hypocrites spring up.

Family relations forgotten: Filial piety and affection arise.

The nation disordered: Patriots come forth.

When Tao is forgotten

There is kindness and justice.

When cleverness and learning arise

There is great duplicity.

When conflict breaks out in the house

There are loving parents and children.

When the country falls into chaos

There are loyal ministers.

FORGOTTEN TAO

When the natural Tao is forgotten,

- Doctrines of humanity and codes of justice arise.

- Knowledge and wisdom appear with artifice

and hypocrisy close behind.

- Harmony departs from family relationships,

and deeds of filial piety and devoted

parenthood replace natural instincts.

- Civil disorder prevails and loyal politicians

become models of dutiful behavior.

When the great Tao is abandoned,

Humanity with righteousness is the practice.

After that, intellect and knowledge appear.

Then comes great hypocrisy.

The six relationships (the entire family) will not be in harmony.

After that, duty and devotion to the state arise.

Families will be in trouble and there will be disorder.

After that, loyal ministers appear.

THE DECAY OF MANNERS

When men abandoned the Way of the Tao, benevolence and justice became

necessary. Then also was need of wisdom and cunning, and all fell into

illusion. When harmony ceased to prevail in the six spheres it was needful

to govern them by manifesting Sons. When the kingdoms and races became

confused, loyal ministers had to appear.

Where the great Spirit is in decline, there is much talk of love andliberty. Where the great Spirit is in decline, there is much talk of prudenceand equality. Where peace is absent in the family, there is much talk offamily devotion. When suppression darkens the lands, everywhere there istalk of loyalty and obedience.

When people deviate from their nature

Friendliness and righteousness became merits to be earned

Knowledge and cleverness came into being and lying started to rule

Relatives came into conflict with each other and loving each other became a duty

Cause when mankind and families get confused

Allegiance becomes an order

When people try to improve upon, and thus deviate from, the way Nature itself naturally functions, they develop artificial codes of right and wrong.

When knowledge becomes highly abstract, men are deceived by mistaking abstractions for realities.

When instinctive family sympathies are replaced by rules for proper conduct then parents become "responsible" and children become "dutiful".

When corruption replaces genuine benevolence in government, then loyalty oaths are demanded of officials.

It was when the Great Way declined

That human kindness and morality arose;

It was when intelligence and knowledge appeared

That the Great Artifice began.

It was when the six near ones were no longer at peace

That there was talk of "dutiful sons";

Nor till fatherland was dark with strife

Did we hear of "loyal slaves".

When Tao is forgotten,

charity and righteousness are born.

When intelligence and knowledge are valued,

duplicity and pretense soon follow.

When the family is discordant,

love and duty are preached.

When the country is in chaos,

loyal patriots appear.

(Where) the great path is abandoned

There appear benevolence & righteousness

(When) the learned & clever emerge

There appear great hypocrisies

(When) the six bonds of kinship are out of balance

There appear filial piety and parental affection

(When) countries & clans are in darkness & turmoil

There appear loyalty & public service

The loss of Tao

Therefore When the great Tao is rejected,

the virtues of humanity and righteousness arise.

When knowledge and wisdom appear,

It is then that the great hypocricy begins.

When the six relations are not in harmony,

Filial piety and compassion arise.

And when the country is in chaos and confusion,

it is then that Virtuous officials appear.

The six relations

Father, sun, older brother,

younger brother, husband and wife

When people lose sight of the Tao, codes of morality and justice are created.

When cleverness and strategies are in use, hypocrites are everywhere.

When families forego natural harmony, parents become pious and children become dutiful.

When the nation is reigned by darkness, patriotic advisers abound.

Wherever the cosmic order is neglected,

Goodness and morality are born.

When the heart's awareness is repressed,

The intellect is led into hypocrisy.

When the family loses its natural harmony,

The rules of duty and honor are enforced.

When the natural society is disrupted,

The dragon of state arises,

And powerful leaders take over.

Separation from the Cosmic Whole is misfortune because it starves the true self in a suffocating act of oppression. This can happen at an intimately individual level (within the heart), among a family, or within an entire society of people, and the result is the same: a forced and false limitation of the natural self, the natural family, or the natural society. The I Ching refers to this type of oppression as "galling limitation" in Hexagram 60, Limitation. It adds that this "galling limitation must not be persevered in."

Lao Tzu reminds us that when the cosmic order is repressed, families, communities, and nations are then turned into food-chain style hierarchies—power structures supported by rigid and superficial notions of morality, intelligence, duty, reward, and obligation. An entire spectrum of sacrificial self-images arises from these ideas: images of the obedient spouse, the sacrificing parent, the hero in society, and the honor of god, country, family, or of the self as defined in the context of the collective, and the forced duties that this honor demands. In the next poem, Chapter 19, and several others, Lao Tzu encourages us to destroy self-images—as individuals, families, and nations—by ridding ourselves of the false ideas that feed them. As he suggests in Chapter 19, we all have the "inner discernment" to detect deceit and oppression; once we nurture and use that natural ability, we can then simply release ourselves of the ideas that further oppression.

Nature is sparing in its talk.

High winds seldom last all morning.

Heavy rains seldom last all day.

Where
do these things originate? In nature.

And if nature so spares its talk,

how much more, then, should you?

The great Tao faded and there was benevolence and righteousness. Worldly wisdom and shrewdness appeared and there was much dissembling.

The family relationships no longer harmonious, there was filial piety and paternal love.

The state and the clans in anarchy, there was loyalty and faithfulness.

When the great Tao is lost, spring forth benevolence and righteousness.

When wisdom and sagacity arise, there are great hypocrites.

When family relations are no longer harmonious, we have filial children and devoted parents.

When a nation is in confusion and disorder, patriots are recognized. Where Tao is, equilibrium is. When Tao is lost, out come all the differences of things.

The Origin of Ethical Concepts

When the great guide is cast aside you will have 'humanity' and 'morality.'

When intuitive wisdom emerges you will have great artifice.

When great kinship is not in harmony, you will have 'filiality' and 'affection.'

When states and great families sink and become deranged, you will have 'loyal
ministers.'

As soon as the great Tao is cast aside,

There prevails the teaching of benevolence and righteousness.

As soon as intellection and prudence are esteemed,

There is produced the great falsehood.

As soon as the members of a family are no longer at peace,

There is a demand for filial piety and love.

As soon as a nation is in confusion and rebellion,

There is a claim for loyal officers.

When the Tao disappears, humanity and justice will appear by themselves.

When intelligence appears, falsity will appear too.

When relatives fall into disharmony, filial piety and kindheartedness will appear.

When the country falls into chaos, official loyalists will appear.

Therefore, only when the great Tao was abandoned

Was there humanity and righteousness;

Only when craft emerged

Was there great deception;

Only when the six blood relations became discordant

Was there filial piety and parental love;

Only when state and fief became chaotic

Were there upright officials.

When the great Tao is lost, justice, righteousness and good will spring forth.

When wisdom and cunning emerge, hypocrisy raises its head.

When family ties are no longer harmonious, honoring parents and caring for children still remain.

When a nation is in a state of confusion and disorder, patriotism becomes evident.

When Tao is present, equilibrium is present.

When Tao is lost, the differences between things emerge.

When the great way falls into disuse

There are benevolence and rectitude;

When cleverness emerges

There is great hypocrisy;

When the six relations are at variance

There are filial children;

When the state is benighted

There are loyal ministers.

The Palliation of Vulgarity

When the great Reason is obliterated, we have benevolence and justice. Prudence and circumspection appear, and we have much hypocrisy.

When family relations no longer harmonize, we have filial piety and paternal devotion. When the country and the clans decay through disorder, we have loyalty and allegiance.

When people are separated from the Tao, they are taught to be kind and ethical. Given intellectual knowledge they lose their intelligence. They are trained to be obedient and polite to make them consistent. Only by suppressing their individuality will they serve abstract concepts, such as a country.

When Grand Direction is not in evidence,

nobleness and righteousness come to the fore.

When cleverness and glibness are in view,

grand pretenses come to the fore.

When family relations are in disharmony,

filiality and parental love come to the fore.

When a state is in disarray,

loyal ministers come to the fore.

When the great Way is abandoned we're faced with Humanity and Duty.

When clever wisdom appears we're faced with duplicity.

When familial harmony ends we're faced with obedience and kindness.

And when chaos engulfs the nation we're faced with trustworthy ministers.

When the great Tao declines,

Then humanity and justice arise.

When knowledge and cleverness appear,

The great hypocrisy follows.

When the six family relationships are in disharmony,

Then filial piety and parental love strengthen.

When a state is in disorderly crisis,

The loyal ministers stand out.

Great
tao discarded, a presence of humanity, morality

Wisdom and intelligence come out, a presence of great pretense

Families lack harmony, a presence of filial devotion and mothering

The nation's emperor blinded, confused, a presence of loyal servants.

When action conforming to the Principle dwindles, (when men cease to act with spontaneous goodness and fairness), artificial principles of goodness and fairness, prudence and wisdom (are invented).

These artificial principles soon degenerate into politics.

When parents no longer live in natural harmony, they try to make up for this deficit by inventing artificial principles of filial piety and paternal affection.

When states had fallen into disarray, they invented the loyal minister stereotype.

The great Tao fades away

There is benevolence and justice

Intelligence comes forth

There is great deception

The six relations are not harmonious

There is filial piety and kind affection

The country is in confused chaos

There are loyal ministers

When people forsake the great Tao, so that it fades away and perishes in their thoughts, concepts like benevolence, compassion, justice and righteousness appear in the world.

When intelligence, book knowledge and cleverness become widespread in the world, we end up with great hypocrisy and deception everywhere

When the six family relationships - parent, child, older sibling, younger sibling, husband, wife - are in a state of disharmony, concepts like filial piety, obedience, and the kind affection of parental love become important and significant.

When the country is in a state of chaos and anarchy, it becomes crucial to make the distinction between ministers who are loyal, and those who are not.

THE PALLIATION OF THE INFERIOR

When the great Tao is lost sight of, we still have the idea of benevolence and righteousness. Prudence and wisdom come to mind when we see great hypocrisy. When relatives are! unfriendly, we still have the teachings of filial piety and paternal affection. When the state and the clan are in confusion and disorder, we still have the ideals of loyalty and faithfulness.

On the decline of the great Tao,

There are humanity (jen) and righteousness (i).

When intelligence (hui) and knowledge (chih) appear,

There is great artificiality (wei).

When the six relations are not in harmony,

There are filial piety (hsiao) and parental love (tz'u).

When a nation is in darkness (hun) and disorder (lüan),

There are loyal ministers.

When Tao is lost, words like "humanity" and "justice" become official doctrines. Then "knowledge" and "wisdom" become official goals. With all this great hypocrisy comes.

When family life is no longer harmonious, obedient children and devoted parents are praised; when a nation has corruption and inefficiency, there is official praise for "loyal citizens".

Wherever there is Tao there is peace and balance. When Tao is lost, divisiveness and differences emerge and grow.

When the Tao is not followed, kindness and morality appear.

When intelligence and learning are exalted,

pretentiousness emerges.

When there is no peace and order in the family,

then we get all kinds of talk about "family values."

When the country is badly governed and in chaos,

we then glorify patriotism.

Eighteen

When the great Tao is forgotten,

Kindness and morality arise.

When wisdom and intelligence are born,

The great pretense begins.

When there is no peace within the family,

Filial piety and devotion arise.

When the country is confused and in chaos,

Loyal ministers appear.

The advocating of benevolence and rectitude

Stems from the disuse of the great Tao.

The great hypocrisy

Follows the emergence of cleverness and wisdom.

Filiality and benevolence come

Along with the family feud.

The loyal subjects show themselves

When the state is in great disorder.

When the great Tao is abandoned,

You have humaneness and righteousness.

When wisdom appears,

You have great falsehood.

When the six relations are in disharmony,

You have filial piety and parental love.

When the state is in disorder,

You have loyal ministers.

When the great Dao is in decline,

Benevolence and loyalty appear.

As wisdom arises, so does hypocrisy.

Only in a feuding family do filial piety and parental doting become conspicuous.

Loyal ministers emerge whenever the country is in chaos.

Social Decadence

Su Po

The Great Tao having been abandoned,

There arise benevolence and righteousness.

With the emergence of wit and wisdom,

There comes into being monstrous hypocrisy.

When the six relatives fail to live in harmony,

There arise filial piety and parental love.

When the state falls into darkness and disorder,

There come into existence loyal ministers.

When the Great Tao is abandoned, then patronage, condescension and righteousness make their appearance;

When knowledge and learning appear, then hypocrites and pretenders make their appearance also;

I tis when closest blood relations are at strife with one noth that we have talk of dutiful children and devoted parents;

It is not until the country is racked with strife and disorder that they patriots spring up.

But in the Tao is balance;

And when the Tao is abandoned, what conflicts!

When Tao is cast aside,

Duty and humanity abide.

When prudence and wit appear,

Great hypocrites are here.

When the six relations have no point,

Filial piety and paternal love are taught.

When the countryside is out of joint,

Loyalty and allegiance are man's lot.

When humankind strayed from the natural way of life,

relative social disciplines began to appear.

When intelligence and cleverness of mind are admired,

great hypocrisy is born.

When disharmony manifested in family relations,

children who respected their parents and parents who loved their children became rare examples.

When chaos prevailed in the country,

only a few loyal ministers were recognized.

Let all people return to their true nature.

Love, kindness, wisdom, family harmony, and loyalty should not be taught one by one,

separately from an honest life.

Then, once again, people will regain the natural virtue of wholeness.

The world will be naturally ordered.

There will be no one who singly and cunningly works for personal interest alone.

XVIII.

A
Vulgar Overgrowth

When
the Great Tao had ceased to be observed,

Benevolence
and Righteousness found place,

And
when world-wisdom linked with shrewdness came,

Then
Grand Hypocrisy exposed her face.

And
now we have, with families all at strife,

Filial
piety, parental care,

With
states and clans disordered and confused,

Loyalty,
and faithfulness are there.

Great Tao lost,

There came the duty to man and right conduct.

Wisdom and shrewdness appearing,

There came great hypocrisy.

The six relationships inharmonious,

There came filial piety deep, deep in the heart.

Kingdoms, families, and clans at war,

There came loyal Ministers.

When
the Great Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

was
abandoned,

There
appeared

duty
and justice.

When
intelligence

and
jokes arose,

There
appeared people

who
said they were one way but lived the opposite.

When
the family

lost
their compatibility,

There
appeared respectful devotion

and
fatherly kindness.

When
darkness and disorder

began
to control a country,

There
appeared

the
loyal and trustworthy patriots.

When the great Way declines, there is "humanity and justice".

When cleverness and knowledge appear, there is "great artificiality".

When the six degrees of kinship do not live in harmony, there are "filial sons".

When state and dynasty are plunged in disorder, there are "loyal ministers".

When the Great Tao (Way or Method) ceased to be observed,

benevolence and righteousness came into vogue. (Then) appeared wisdom

and shrewdness, and there ensued great hypocrisy.

When
harmony no longer prevailed throughout the six kinships,

filial sons found their manifestation; when the states and clans fell

into disorder, loyal ministers appeared.

Therefore;
when the Heavenly Way was forgotten,
there arose 'humaneness'
and 'righteousness;'
when cunning and Wit arose,
there came great falsity;

when the loving relations between people, as if all of one family,
was
lost, there arose Religions in the world.
Once the state and royal house
were in disarray,
there arose 'upright ministers!'

Goodness
and compliance

Came when people lost the way

Spontaneity declined

Hypocrisy was here to stay

WHEN the Great Tao was abandoned,

There appeared humanity and justice.

When intelligence and wit arose,

There appeared great hypocrites.

When the six relations lost their harmony,

There appeared filial piety and paternal kindness.

When darkness and disorder began to reign in a kingdom,

There appeared the loyal ministers.

When the way of the Tao is forgotten,

morality and ethics need to be stressed.

When the body's innate intelligence is not heeded,

deception becomes routine, and men learn to pretend to be wise and good.

When genuine peace among people is not regarded;

filial piety and compassion are made apparent.

When a nation falls into chaos; loyalty and patriotism are renewed.

When the great Tao is abandoned,

charity and righteousness appear.

When intellectualism arises,

hypocrisy is close behind.

When
there is strife in the family unit,

people talk about 'brotherly love'.

When
the country falls into chaos,

politicians talk about 'patriotism'.

Do not lose sight of the single principle: how everything works.

When this principle is lost and the method of meditating on process fails, the group becomes mired in intellectual discussion of what could have happened, what should have happened, what this technique or that might do. Soon the group will become quarrelsome and depressed.

Once you leave the path of simple consciousness, you enter the labyrinth of cleverness, competition, and imitation.

When a lesser person forgets that all creation is a unity, allegiance goes to lesser wholes such as the family, the home team, or the company.

Nationalism, racism, classism, sexism: all arise as consciousness of unity is lost. People take sides and favour this versus that.

When the great Tao is abandoned,

Ideas of "humanitarianism" and "righteousness" appear.

When intellectualism arises

It is accompanied by great hypocrisy.

When there is strife within a family

Ideas of "brotherly love" appear.

When a nation is plunged into chaos

Politicians become "patriotic."

When
the oneness of Infinity is forgotten,

judgment appears and people are

distinguished as good and righteous.

When
the illusion of knowledge and understanding

appear,

the physical reality has been confused with

Infinity.

When
there is no peace and harmony within the

family,

a facade of devotion and obedience is

perceived.

When
a nation manifests great change,

patriots step forward

to attempt to resurrect the past.

When great Tao is neglected,

there will be artificial charity.

When wisdom and cleverness appear,

there will be great pretentions.

When the six family relations are not in harmony,

there will be filial compassion.

When politicians are confused,

there will be loyal ministers.

When Tao is abandoned,

Benevolence and morality arise.

When wisdom and knowledge arise,

Hypocrisy flourishes.

When there is discord in the family,1

Filial piety and parental affection arise.

When the country is in darkness and turmoil,

Loyal ministers appear.

1. Strictly, 'when the six family relationships are not in harmony'. These are the relationships of father and son, elder brother and younger brother, and husband and wife. (This conception of family relationships is clearly sexist, leaving out of account mothers, daughters and sisters.)

When the Way is lost

There needs to be grace and kindness.

When sophisticated knowledge is produced

There must be falsehood.

When relatives turn rude to each other,

There must be filial piety.

When a country is in chaos,

There will appear loyalty.

When Great Tao vanished we got 'Goodness and Morality.'

When 'Wisdom and Know-how' arose we got the Great Shams.

When the six family relationships fell into disharmony we got 'Respect and Caring.'

When the states and the great families became all benighted and disordered we got 'Loyal Subjects'.

If people in the country denied Great Tao, then they start talking about 'humanism' and 'justice'... But in such a situation, these talks are nothing but a great hypocrisy!

In a similar way, when there is discord in the family, then there arise demands of "filial obedience" and "parent's love"...

And when in the whole state there is such disarray — there appear slogans of "patriotism" and "love for motherland"...

When the Tao Way is lost,

The multitude of laws and rules will appear.

When the Ego is strong in people

The hypocritical behavior is strong too.

When the family bonds are loosen,

The family issues are in the attention of everyone.

When a nation is in confusion,

The country will have a lot of patriots.

Being
on the Tao Way, things are in equilibrium,

Without Tao, a multitude of differences will appear.

When
the great Dao is abandoned there then appear benevolence and righteousness.
When intelligence and knowledge come into being there then appears great artifice.
When the six kinds of kin are no longer in harmony then filial piety and parental
compassion appear. When the realm is in disorder then there come to be loyal
ministers.

When the Great Tao is abandoned,

There are human-heartedness and righteousness;

When knowledge and wisdom arise,

There is great hypocrisy;

When the six relations are not in accord,

There are filial piety and paternal affection;

When a country is in disorder,

There are loyal ministers.

Losing the Instincts

When the great Tao is forgotten,

Philanthropy and morality appear.

Intelligent strategies are produced,

And great hypocrisies emerge.

When the Family has no Harmony,

Piety and devotion appear.

The nation is confused by chaos,

And loyal patriots emerge.

As the Dao fades, law and justice take hold. The great truths are lost and knowledge will flow from a book rather than the heart. The ruling class will discern the loyal from the treacherous and war will loom on the horizon. Lead your sons with your heart, not with your fist.

The mighty Way declined among the folk

And then came kindness and morality.

When wisdom and intelligence appeared,

They brought with them a great hypocrisy.

The six relations were no more at peace,

So codes were made to regulate our homes.

The fatherland grew dark, confused by strife:

Official loyalty became the style.

When the Great Tao is abandoned,

The doctrines of benevolence and righteousness will come to light.

When knowledge and wisdom appear,

Great hypocrisy will also emerge.

When a family falls into dispute,

Filial piety and parental affection to children will be advocated.

When a country falls into disorder,

There will be loyal ministers.

It is when the great Dao is forsaken that benevolence and righteousness appear,

When wisdom and intelligence emerge that great falsehood occurs,

When the six relations exist in disharmony that the obedient and the kind appear, and when the state is in disorder that loyal ministers arise.

1. Therefore, when the Great Way is rejected, it is then that we have the virtues
of humanity and righteousness;

2. When knowledge and wisdom appear, it is then that there is great hypocrisy;

3. When the six relations are not in harmony, it is then that we have filial
piety and compassion;

4. And when the country is in chaos and confusion, it is then that there are
virtuous officials.

When people
ignore Tao,

they start talking about "righteousness" and "sanctity".

When they forget what's true,

they start talking about "self-evident truths".

When they do not respect each other,

they start talking about "political correctness"

and "family values".

When the nation is unstable,

they start talking about "patriotism".

.

When the Way is Forgotten

When the great Way is forgotten,

the doctrines of humanity and morality arise.

When knowledge and cleverness appear,

there emerges great hypocrisy.

When family relationships are not in harmony,

filial piety and parental love are advocated.

When a country falls into chaos and disorder,

there is praise of loyal patriots.

Separated from the origin there is talk of humaneness and justice.

Where wisdom gives way to smartness cunning and lying appear.

Separated from the All-relatedness and All-union man seeks a substitute in human relationships and family ties.

When consciousness of the unity of mankind vanished clans and peoples and feud without end arose.

The Tao Is Not In Use

Lao Tze says,

When the great Tao is not in use, benevolence and righteousness come into vogue.

When wisdom and shrewdness appear, there ensures great hypocrisy.

When six kinships no longer live at peace, filial piety and lenity find their manifestation.

When the state falls into chaos, loyal ministers appear.

THE DECAY OF ETHICS

When
the way of the Tao is forgotten,

kindness and ethics need to be taught;

men learn to pretend to be wise and good.

All
too often in the lives of men,

filial piety and devotion

arise only after conflict and strife,

just as loyal ministers all too often appear,

when the people are suppressed.

When the great Tao is forgotten,

goodness and piety appear.

When the body's intelligence declines,

cleverness and knowledge step forth.

When there is no peace in the family,

filial piety begins.

When the country falls into chaos,

patriotism is born.

When the superior Dao was lost, benevolence and righteousness were created.

When intelligence and skills prevailed, superior hypocrisy was displayed.

When family relations were not in harmony, filial piety and parental kindness were encouraged.

When a country was in disorder and justice failed, loyalty and reliability were required.

When the Great Tao is abandoned,

There is benevolence and righteousness.

When intelligence arises,

There is a great deal of manipulation.

When there is disharmony in the family,

There comes about filial piety.

When the country is in big trouble,

There arises patriotism.

XVIII

What
happens when the nation wanders from the tao?

The people first try to be polite, assuming things will balance themselves

Then they try to be informed, or clever, or wise, and search for solutions

Then they turn to morality, like drowning men clinging to driftwood

And only after that, when the whole land is in turmoil

Do they throw up their hands and cry for strong and loyal leaders

Wben the Great Way Is Deserted

When the Great Way is deserted,

then there is humanitarian duty.

When intelligence comes forth,

there is great fabrication.

When relations are discordant,

then there is family love.

When the national polity

is benighted and confused,

then there are loyal ministers.

Because morality is abandoned, good behavior becomes distinguished.

Because there is cleverness, cheating could accompany it.

Because family members do not get along, rules for respecting elderly and loving youngsters are created.

Because the country is in chaos, there is need for honest and able officers to uphold order.

When the great Way was abandoned, there appeared benevolence and righteousness.

When intelligence arose, there appeared the great lying.

When the six relations lost their harmony, there appeared filial piety and paternal kindness.

When darkness and disorder began to reign in a kingdom, there appeared the loyal ministers.

Lost the great Tao, Jen (kindness) and iL (morality) arise.

The rise of wisdom and intelligence, cheating begins.

Family quarrels, filial piety and devotion arise.

Country in turmoil, loyalty appears.

When the great Tao is forgotten,

benevolence and moral codes arise.

When shrewdness and cleverness appear,

great hypocrisy follows.

When there is no harmony in the family,

filial manners are developed

When the country is in disorder,

ministers appear as loyal servants.

When
nature is forgotten and abandoned,

goodness, justice and morality are created,

and theisms flourish.

When intelligence and knowledge appear,

great advertising campaigns are created,

and religions compete.

When
partners and family members are not at peace

they begin talking about relationships and

duties and responsibilities

and spiritual needs.

When
there is tension, distrust,

and revolution

in a community,

we hear calls for

loyal followers.

When the great dao declined,

jen and i arose, humanity and righteousness."

Next, when brightness and know-how came in vogue,

the great pretence fully started.

When
the six family relationships are not in harmony

There's open talk of kind parents" dutiful sons" and deep love to children.

A confused country enmeshed in disorder praises ministers in chaos and misrule.

Therefore,

When the great Way was forsaken,

there was humaneness and righteousness;

When cunning and wit appeared,

there was great falsity;

When the six family relationships lacked harmony,

there were filial piety and parental kindness;

When the state and royal house were in disarray,

there were upright ministers.

When the great Tao is lost men follow after charity and duty to one's neighbours.

When wisdom has met with honours the world is full of pretenders.

When family ties are severed then filial duty and parental indulgence take their place

When a nation is filled with strife then do patriots flourish.

It Can't Be Forced

When the soul of a relationship is lost

self-help books appear on the coffee table.

When grace is not experienced

behavior is scrutinized carefully.

When harmony is missing

the talk is about, ''my needs," and "your needs."

When the relationship is dying

loyalty and fidelity are demanded.

Return to your heart.

Here is where your relationship must live.

"Working on a relationship"

can be an illusion.

Trying to carve your relationship

into an idealized image

will damage you both.

The real thing lives

within each of you.

It can't be forced,

only allowed to emerge.

Can you see it?

When the great Tao declined, The doctrine of humanity and righteousness arose.

When knowledge and wisdom appeared, There emerged great hypocrisy.

When the six family relationships are not in harmony, There will be the advocacy of filial piety and deep love to children.

When a country is in disorder, There will be the praise of loyal ministers.

When people
lost sight of the way to live

Came codes of love and honesty,

Learning came, charity came,

Hypocrisy took charge;

When differences weakened family ties

Came benevolent fathers and dutiful sons;

And when lands were disrupted and misgoverned

Came ministers commended as loyal.

When the DAO is thrown away, charity and righteousness have to be used to govern people.

When simplicity is replaced by smartness and calculations, there will be a lot of wicked people.

Only when a family is not in harmony, will a good son or father become precious;

Only when a country is in ruins, will heroes appear.

When the inner truth of the Tao is lost,

The outer code of morality comes into being.

When cleverness reigns in the world,

Hypocrisy becomes rampant;

When discord arises in the family,

Filiality is emphasized;

When chaos befalls the nation,

Respect is accorded to loyal subjects alone.

When the Way is lost

There needs to be grace and kindness.

When sophisticated knowledge is produced

There must be falsehood.

When relatives turn rude to each other,

There must be filial piety.

When a country is in chaos,

There will appear loyalty.

When the way of the Tao is forgotten,

morality and ethics need to be stressed.

When the body's innate intelligence is not heeded,

deception becomes routine, and men learn to pretend to be wise and good.

When genuine peace among people is not regarded;

filial piety and compassion are made apparent.

When a nation falls into chaos; loyalty and patriotism are renewed.

