===== Chapter 68 =====

Those who are skilled at being warriors are not warlike.

Those who are skilled at fighting are not angry.

Those who are skilled at overcoming enemies do not engage [them].

Those who are skilled at managing people act humbly toward them.

This is called the virtue of non-contention.

This is called the power of managing people.

This is called merging with Heaven, the Oldest of Old.

The accomplished person is not aggressive. The good soldier is not hot tempered.

The best conqueror does not engage the enemy. The most effective leader takes the lowest place.

This is called the Te of not contending. This is called the power of the
leader. This is called matching Heaven's ancient ideal.

The best soldier is not violent.

The best fighter does not fly into rage.

The best winner does not engage the opponent.

The best employer does not put himself above others.

This is the virtue of non-contending.

This is the ability of managing people.

This is the finest way of matching heaven.

NON - CONTENTION

The greatest warrior shuns the violence of war.

The greatest fighter shuns the display of anger.

The greatest conqueror shuns overt competition.

The greatest leader is humble with his people.

Thus is the power of non-contention.

Thus is the capacity to utilize people well.

Thus is the ancient ultimate unity with heaven.

The good actions of the masters* are not warlike or aggressive.

A skillful battle does not include anger.

To skillfully defeat an enemy, do not join them in their anger.

Employ people well by staying below them.

The action of the soul is called employing people's strengths.

This is called complying with Heaven's ancient perfection.

* The person who knows all from 1-10.

ASSIMILATING ONE'S SELF TO HEAVEN

He that is skilled in war maketh no fierce gestures; the most efficient

fighter bewareth of anger. He who conquereth refraineth from engaging in

battle; he whom men most willingly obey continueth silently with his

Work. So it is said: 'He is mighty who fighteth not; he ruleth who

uniteth with his subjects; he shineth whose will is that of Heaven.'

He who in (Tao's) wars has skill Assumes no martial port; He who fightswith most good will To rage makes no resort. He who vanquishes yet stillKeeps from his foes apart; He whose hests men most fulfil Yet humbly plieshis art. Thus we say, 'He ne'er contends, And therein is his might.' Thuswe say, 'Men's wills he bends, That they with him unite.' Thus we say,'Like Heaven's his ends, No sage of old more bright.'

[Note: hests are commands, orders.]

One who fights for peace is non-violent

A true fighter is unshakeable

A true victor does not argue

A true leader is the least

That's what people call "non-violent defensibility"

And that's how one gets the people on his side

That is called "living according to your nature"

That is the perfection of which the wise of old spoke

The best soldier does not attack. The superior fighter succeeds without violence.

The greatest conqueror wins without a struggle. The most successful manager leads without dictating.

This is called intelligent nonaggressiveness. This is called mastery of men. This is called matching the wisdom of the highest and oldest in Nature.

The best charioteers do not rush ahead;

The best fighters do not make displays of wrath.

The greatest conqueror wins without joining issue;

The best user of men acts as though he were their inferior.

This is called the power that comes of not contending,

Is called the capacity to use men,

The secret of being mated to heaven, to what was of old.

A good general is not aggressive.

A good warrior is not wrathful.

A skillful conqueror does not instigate battle.

A skillful employer serves those under him.

This is the virtue of not contending.

This is mastering the strength of others.

This is being in accord with the principles of heaven.

The student skilled at action is not aggressive

The one skilled at combat is not angry

The one at besting opponents does not participate

The one skilled at employing others behaves as their subordinate

This may be styled the "virtue of not contending"

It may be styled "applying another's power"

It may be styled "siding with heaven,"

The consummation of antiquity

Using men

Therefore, one who is good at being a warrior,

Does not make a show of his might;

One who is a good in battle does not get angry;

One who is good at defeating the enemy

Does not engage him.

And one who is goed at using men

Places himself below them.

This is called the Virtue of not competing;

This is called the ability to deal with people.

This is called matching Heaven.

It is the high point of the past.

A good general doesn't show off his power. a good warrior doen't get angry.

A good conqueror doesn't attack people. A good employer puts himself below his employees.

This is called the power of noncontention. This is called using the strength of others. This is called perfect emulation of heaven.

The natural fighter spurns aggression,

For a war cannot be won in vengeance.

He defeats his enemy by discarding enmity.

A skillful manager directs the work

By humbly serving those who do it.

This is called natural Modesty:

It gets things done without striving,

And lets each individual achieve his destiny.

Though the world may call it great,

It is simply the surpassing of greatness.

In the inner war, a spirit of vengeance inflames and empowers the demons of ego, since it casts us headlong into the bloody hell of opposition. This undermines the goal of self-development, which is to kill and transform the demonic consciousness of acculturation. To manage such a war correctly requires an attitude of humility—you put the work into the hands of those best able to do it right—the helping energies of the hidden world. This is how true greatness is achieved.

Victory in Tao

The
most skilled soldier is not aggressive.

The most proficient fighter never loses control.

The most victorious commander does not bicker.

The most efficient leader is humble before all.

This
is the virtue of serenity.

This is the mastery of life.

This is matching Teh to Tao.

The most skillful warriors are not warlike; the best fighters are not wrathful; the mightiest conquerors never strive; the greatest masters are ever lowly.

This is the glory of non-strife; and the might of utilization; these equal heaven, they were the goal of the ancients

The best soldier is not soldierly;

The best fighter is not ferocious;

The best conqueror does not take part in war;

The best employer of men keeps himself below them.

This is called the virtue of not contending;

This is the ability of using men;

This is called the supremacy of consorting with heaven.

Coinciding with Nature

Those who are good champions don't battle.

Those who are good at war don't get angry.

Those who are good at defeating the enemy don't engage them.

Those who are good at using people deem it as a something beneath them.

This is called virtuosity at not contending.

This is called the power of using people.

This is called on a par with nature--the apex of antiquity.

A good soldier is free from violence.

A good fighter is free from rage.

A good winner is free from competition.

A good leader is humble before the people.

This is called the attainment of non-contention,

Or the application of the strength of others.

It is also called identity with the ultimate

Beyond space and time.

The perfect warrior does not flaunt his bravery.

The perfect fighter does not get angry.

The perfect winner does not reveal his tactics.

The perfect employer is humble before his employees.

This is called the virtue of non-fighting.

This is called the ability to manage others.

This is called uniting with the law of Heaven.

Since ancient times, it has been the highest goal.

Therefore, a good commander is not militant;

A good strategist is not irritable;

A good vanquisher of enemies is not confrontational;

A good employer of men stays low to them.

This is called the virtue of noncontention;

This is called the ability of employing men;

This is called a match for heaven,

A paragon among the ancients.

The whole world tells me:

"Great as the Tao is, it has no form."

Since it is great,

It has no form.

If it resembled any form,

It would have waned a long time ago.

I have three treasures that I keep and safeguard:

The first is called love,

The second is called moderation,

The third is called not jumping to the head of the entire world.

With love, a person can be courageous,

With moderation, a person can be generous,

And by not jumping to the head of the world, a person can be the master of all the ministers.

Without love, a person can only have courage,

Without moderation, a person can only have generosity,

And instead of staying behind, a person can go to the front.

This leads nowhere but to death.

The person who fights with love will win the battle,

The person who defends himself with love will be safe.

Heaven will save him and protect him with love.

One who excels as a warrior does not appear formidable;

One who excels in fighting is never roused in anger;

One who excels in defeating his enemy does not join issue;

One who excels in employing others humbles himself before them.

This
is known as the virtue of non-contention;

This is known as making use of the efforts of others;

This is known as matching the sublimity of heaven.

Complying With Heaven

He who excels as a warrior is not warlike. He who excels as a fighter is not wrathful. He who excels in conquering the enemy does not strive. He who excels in employing men is lowly.

This is called the virtue of not-striving. This is called utilizing men's ability. This is called complying with heaven-since olden times the highest.

The best warrior isn't intent on killing. The best sportsman isn't concerned about winning. The best tactician enters the mind of his opponent. A true businessman works for the good of the community, not to rape them of their wealth and destroy the earth. A true leader has no agenda. Competition breeds violence. Peace can only be had by doing away with it.

One good at commandership does not easily use force,

one good at war is not easily provoked,

one good at winning does not easily engage in combat,

one good at deployment is obsequious.

This is the virtue of non-engagement; this is the ability at deployment.

This is fully consistent with the cosmos.

A noble official is never warlike,

and a noble warrior is never angered.

A noble conqueror never faces an enemy,

and a noble leader stays below the people he wields.

This is called the Integrity of peacefulness, the power of wielding the people,

the fullest extent of our ancient accord with heaven.

A good statesman does not rely on his military strength;

A good fighter does not lose his temper;

A good winner does not argue with his adversary;

A good employer of talents places himself below them.

This is the virtue of no contention;

This is the strength of managing talents;

This is the adaptation to Heaven,

The ultimate standard of old.

Those
who value acting as sergeants lack ferocity

Those who value war lack anger

Those who value conquering lack engagement

Those who value using men are acting low.

Appropriately
called ideal of lacking being contending

Appropriately called strength to be using men

Appropriately called distributing the ancient limit of the heavens.

He who commands should not think that tactics, valour, and effort give victory.

It is by putting oneself at the service of men that one subdues them. That is the correct procedure.

It is sometimes formulated as follows: art of not struggling (of accommodating oneself, of winning be making oneself everything to everyone); of ability to manage men; of action conforming to that of heaven. All these formulae designate the same thing. They show the greatness of the ancients.

The great generals are not warlike

The great warriors do not get angry

Those who are good at defeating enemies do not engage them

Those who are good at managing people lower themselves

It is called the virtue of non-contention

It is called the power of managing people

It is called being harmonious with heaven

The ultimate principle of the ancients

Those who excel in the art of command do not wage war lightly. The truly great generals and strategists do not show aggression or put their military power on display.

Those who excel in battles do not lose themselves to anger. By being calm and collected, they increase their effectiveness in action.

Those who are truly good at winning do not need to engage their enemies in physical combat. They can achieve victory with a minimum of fighting, or no fighting at all.

Those who are truly good at management are humble. Because they are not arrogant in assuming that they are more capable than everyone else, they are able to delegate authority and empower others to fully utilize their talents.

All of the above are examples of the virtue we call non-contention. It is a virtue that applies not only to military leadership, but also to our social interactions. It is a powerful way to manage our personal relationships with other people.

We follow this virtue because it harmoniously matches the heavenly laws of nature. Nature is non-contentious. In a thunderstorm there is tremendous power - but no hatred, anger, or arrogance. When the ancient sages noted this, they made non-contention their ultimate principle.

COMPLIANCE WITH HEAVEN

He who excels as a soldier is the one who is not warlike; he who fights the best fight is not wrathful; he who best conquers an enemy is not quarrelsome; he who best employs people is obedient himself.

This is the virtue of not-quarreling, this is the secret of bringing out other men's ability, this is complying with Heaven. Since of old it is considered the greatest virtue (teh).

A good captain does not exhibit his martial prowess.

A good warrior does not get himself angry.

A good conqueror of enemies does not instigate a combat.

A good employer of people puts himself below them.

This is called the power (te) of non-contention.

This is called using the strength of others.

This is called perfection (chi) in matching the heaven of old.

Victory in Tao

The most skilled soldier is not aggressive; the most proficient fighter never loses control; the most victorious commander does not bicker; the most efficient leader is humble before all. This is the virtue of serenity. This is the mastery of life. This is matching Teh to Tao.

The best soldier does not rush into battle.

The best fighter does not display his anger.

The best conqueror does not take vengeance on his enemy.

The best leader is the best follower.

This is known as the power [Te] of not contending.

This is known as true leadership.

This is known as following Heaven's lead.

Sixty-eight

A good soldier is not violent.

A good fighter is not angry.

A good winner is not vengeful

A good employer is humble.

This is known as the Virtue of not striving.

This is known as ability to deal with people.

This since ancient times has been known as the ultimate unity with heaven.

He who is good at being a commander

Does not display his bravery;

He who is good at fighting

Does not burst into anger;

He who is good at defeating his enemy

Does not brace himself to engage in a tough battle;

He who is good at employing men

Humbles himself before them;

This is called the virtue of non-contention;

This is called making use of others' strength;

This is called conformability to the Tao of heaven.

A good warrior is not belligerent;

A good fighter is not given to anger;

One who is good at winning does not engage the enemy;

One who is good at using others takes the lower position.

This is called the Te of non-contention;

This is called making use of the strength of others;

This is called fit to be Heaven's mate.

It is the ultimate [truth] of old.

The accomplished general does not appear intimidating.

The consummate warrior does not exhibit any anger.

The victorious commander does not contend.

A good manager often appears meek and humble.

All the above examples display the virtue of non-contention.

With this virtue you can capitalise on others' expertise.

This is in accord with the way of Dao - the celestial way.

Harmony with Heaven

P'ei T'ien

A good warrior is not warlike;

A good fighter does not lose his temper;

A good conqueror is not pugnacious;

A good leader of men is humble.

This is called the virtue of non-contention,

Also called the use of other's strength,

Also called harmony with Heaven's Eternal Supreme Will.

The captain who is most accomplished does not make a display of warlike zeal;

The best fighter is not angry;

He who is most capable of conquering does not engage the enemy;

He who is most capable of using men places himself in a position inferior to them.

This may be called the Virtue of Non-striving,

The power to use men;

It is to work in consort with heaven itself,

And attain the highest ideal of the Ancients.

A good soldier is not violent;

A good fighter has no wrath.

The best way to win over an enemy

Is not to contend with him.

The best way to use a man

Is to work under him.

Call this not-competing in virtue.

Call this using human strengths.

Call this mating with heaven as of old.

A good warrior is never violent.

A good fighter is never offensive.

A great victor defeats his opponent, but not by challenging him.

A great commander is humble.

This is called the power of non-contention.

This is also called making use of the effort of others.

To follow this is to follow the pattern of the subtle law of the universe.

LXVIII.

Fellowship
with Heaven

The
great commander is not a warlike man,

The
hardest fighter is not a man of wrath,

The
greatest conqueror shares not in the strife,

The great
employer treads the workmen s path.

This
is the virtue known as striving not,

The
wondrous power of utilizing men,

And
this is called the fellowship with Heaven,

The
fellowship the ancients followed then.

He who loves, in being a soldier is not warlike.

He who loves, in fighting is not angry.

He who loves, in conquering does not grasp fo self.

He who loves, in employing men is lowly before them.

This is called Manifestation of non-greed.

It is called the power of using men.

It is called Unity with Heaven.

Of Old it was man's highest aim.

A good soldier

is never the first to fight;

A good fighter

is never angry.

The best way

of beating an enemy

Is to win them over

by not disagreeing with them.

The best way

of employing a person

Is to serve under them.

This is called

the virtue (power) of non-striving!

This is called

using the abilities of people!

This is called

being wedded to Heaven like in the past!

A good captain is not impetuous.

A good fighter is not angry.

A good conqueror does not engage his adversaries.

A good user of men makes himself inferior to them.

This may be called the Virtue of not striving. This may be called the strength to use men. This may be called the acme of conformity to heaven.

He who in (Tao's) wars has skill

Assumes no martial port;

He who fights with most good will

To rage makes no resort.

He who vanquishes yet still

Keeps from his foes apart;

He whose hests men most fulfil

Yet humbly plies his art.

Thus
we say, 'He ne'er contends,

And therein is his might.'

Thus we say, 'Men's wills he bends,

That they with him unite.'

Thus we say, 'Like Heaven's his ends,

No sage of old more bright.'

A
good warrior is not belligerent.
A good fighter does not anger.
A good
conqueror does not dislike his enemy.
One who is good at employing others
puts themself below them.
This is called "the virtue of non competitiveness."

This is called "utilizing others."
This is called "parity with heaven,"

-the pinnacle of the Ancient Masters.

Violence
is not the way

The greatest warriors know

That treachery and anger

Will not defeat the foe

You
only win if you don't strive

And gain if you do not oppose

This is the certain victory

Simplicity bestows

A GOOD soldier is never aggressive;

A good fighter is never angry.

The best way of conquering an enemy

Is to win him over by not antagonising him.

The best way of employing a man

Is to serve under him.

This is called the virtue of non-striving!

This is called using the abilities of men!

This is called being wedded to Heaven as of old!

The best warrior does not give free reign to violence.

The most skillful fighter will not let anger cloud his mind.

The skilful tactician wins without a battle.

A great commander overcomes men by placing himself below them.

This is known as the 'virtue of not striving'.

It is also called the ability to manage others.

This is regarded as the earthly embodiment of the way of Heaven.

The best warriors

do not use violence.

The best generals

do not destroy indiscriminately.

The best tacticians

try to avoid confrontation.

The best leaders

becomes servants of their people.

This
is called the virtue of non-competition.

This is called the power to manage others.

This is called attaining harmony with the heavens.

The greatest martial arts are the gentlest. They allow an attacker the opportunity to fall down.

The greatest generals do not rush into every battle. They offer the enemy many opportunities to make self-defeating errors.

The greatest administrators do not achieve production through constraints and limitations. They provide opportunities.

Good leadership consists of motivating people to their highest levels by offering them opportunities, not obligations.

That is how things happen naturally. Life is an opportunity and not an obligation.

The best soldier is not violent.

The best fighter is not driven by anger.

The true conqueror wins without confrontation.

The best employer is humble before his employees.

I say there is much good in not competing.

I call it using the power of the people.

This is known as being in tune with Heaven, Like the Sages of old.

A
warrior in harmony is not contemptuous of life.

A prize fighter in harmony is not angry.

A winner in harmony understands the

oneness of winning and losing.

An employer in harmony is at one with

his employees.

This
is called non-distinction and indifference.

It is known as being at peace and in harmony

with others.

It is the manifestation of the ultimate peace

and harmony of Infinity.

A good officer is not aggressive.

A good warrior is not angry.

A good victor is not partisan.

A good commander is humble.

This is the virtue of not competing.

This is the proper use of men's abilities.

This is the ultimate union with Heaven of old.

He who makes a good soldier is not violent.

He who makes a good fighter is not angry.

He who makes a good conqueror does not compete.1

He who is skilful in making the best use of people, places himself under them.

This is called the Virtue of not competing.

This is called making use of people.

This is called matching the sublimity of Heaven.2

1. i.e. he overcomes his enemies without the need to fight them.

2. i.e. accomplishing things, like Heaven, without striving.

A true gentleman admires no martial arts.

An invincible warrior never resorts to anger.

A true winner never appears in any encounter.

A wise employer never looks superior.

Holders of the true Way struggle for nothing of their own,

And depend on resources of strength other than their own.

The best ability of all time matches that of the heaven.

The best soldier is not warlike the best fighter shows no anger

the one best at defeating the enemy does not engage him the one best at managing people puts himself below them.

This is the Te of not contending this is the power to manage people. This is being the Counterpart of Heaven equalling the very best of the ancients.

The wise leader is never bellicose. The wise soldier does not get angry. He who can win does not attack first. He who can lead people does not humiliate them, but puts himself into a lower position.

Such are the laws of Te that denounce anger, self-praise, and violence. In this way act Those Who represent Te and guide people to Primordial and Eternal Tao.

Compassion is the best defense.

A good fighter is not afraid and not aggressive,

An efficient conqueror is not involved in heavy fighting,

A true leader does not display his authority in an aggressive way.

The
courageous and not-threatening one attracts people,

A good conqueror does not base his gain through violence,

A good leader does not acquire his status through aggressive authority,

Because the path of harmony generate harmony in everything.

Those
who are good at being knights are not martial. Those who are good at warfare
do not rage. Those who are good at overcoming their adversaries do not join
issue. Those who are good at employing others put themselves beneath them. That
is called the virtue of non-contention. That is called the power to employ others.
That is called the perfection attained by becoming a match with Heaven.

One who makes a good general is not warlike;

One who makes a good fighter is not angry;

One who makes a great conqueror of his enemies does not strive;

One who knows how to manage the people well places himself under them.

This is called the virtue of not competing.

This is called the power of using people.

This is called the match of Heaven, the ultimate of the Ancients.

Nonaggressive Strength

A skillful leader does not use force.

A skillful fighter does not feel anger.

A skillful master does not engage the opponent.

A skillful employer remains low.

This is called the power in not contending.

This is called the strength to employ others.

This is called the highest emulation of Nature.

To be in harmony with the Dao, be like the child playing sports. Not in it for fame or fortune. Not in it to win. They play to enjoy.

A skillful soldier is not violent;

An able fighter does not rage;

A mighty conqueror does not give battle;

A great commander is a humble man.

You
may call this pacific virtue;

Or say that it is mastery of men;

Or that it is rising to the measure of God,

Or to the stature of the ancients.

He who is god at being a shi (officer) does not boast of his martialism;

He who is good at fighting does not resort to his rage;

He who is skillful in winning against the enemy does not wrestle with them;

He who is skillful in managing his men has a modest attitude toward them.

This is called the De of not contending with others;

This is called the power of making use of others' force;

This is called being in accord with the Way of Heaven,

Thus it has been a principle very long since.

One good at being a warrior is not warlike.

One good at warfare avoids anger.

One good at conquering the enemy does not join with him.

One good at using men places himself below them.

We refer to these as the virtue in not fighting and the power in using men.

Such a one is called a companion worthy of Heaven, the ultimate attainment achieved for all time.

1. Therefore, one who is good at being a warrior doesn't make a show of his
might;

2. One who is good in battle doesn't get angry;

3. One who is good at defeating the enemy doesn't engage him.

4. And one who is good at using men places himself below them.

5. This is called the virtue of not competing;

6. This is called [correctly] using men;

7. This is called matching Heaven.

8. It's the high point of the past.

A true warrior
never uses force

with an attitude of pride or anger.

A true victor

does not pursue vengeance.

A true leader shows humility.

This is the
power of modesty.

It's the best way to deal with people.

It's always been an excellent way

to get right with Tao.

.

The Power of Not Striving

The best soldier is not violent.

The best fighter is not angry.

The best winner is not contentious.

The best employer is humble.

This is known as the power of not striving,

as ability in human relations,

and as being in accord with heaven.

A good manager manages without force a god fighter wins without fighting a good conqueror conquers without struggle a good user of men controls without constraint.

Such is the virtue of non-resistance such is the art of resolving through moderation.

Such is: being like heaven the highest goal of all times.

The Way to Triumph

Lao Tze says,

He who is skillful as a good warrior assumes no martial posture.

He who is skillful as a good gladiator will not rise in anger.

He who is skillful in vanquishing his foes will keep apart from them.

He who is skillful in employing will keep a low profile.

All these are the attributes of non-contention,

the methods of using man's abilities,

the way of matching with Heaven's secret,

and the highest art of antiquity.

WITHOUT DESIRE

An
effective warrior acts

not from nihilistic anger,

nor from desire to kill.

He
who wins should not be vengeful.

An employer should have humility.

If
we wish for peace and unity,

our dealings with our fellow man

must be without desire for self-advantage,

and carried out without contention.

The best athlete

wants his opponent at his best.

The best general

enters the mind of his enemy.

The best businessman

serves the communal good.

The best leader

follows the will of the people.

All of the embody

the virtue of non-competition.

Not that they don't love to compete,

but they do it in the spirit of play.

In this they are like children

and in harmony with the Tao.

In the ancient times:

The perfect warriors were not warlike.

The perfect fighters were not angry.

The perfect winners were not aggressive and the perfect diplomats were humble before the world.

This is called the practice of the virtue of non-struggle.

This is called the use of the wisdom of benevolence.

This is called to comply with the ultimate Nature.

Being a good warrior does not entail power.

A good fighter is not angry.

One who is good at overcoming the enemy does not contact him.

One who is good at leading people acts humbly.

This is called the Action of noncompetition.

This is called leading people.

This is called the Ultimate as old as heaven.

LXVIII

Therefore
a good leader, like a good soldier

Sees no need to flaunt her might

Never lets his passions sway him out of balance

Allows her opponents to overextend themselves

And in all things places himself below others

If
you don't compete, then you're dealing with men correctly

And the tao, in all its antiquity, is on your side

Good Warriors

Good warriors do not arm,

good fighters don't get mad,

good winners don't contend,

good employers serve their workers.

This is called the virtue

of noncontention;

this is called mating with

the supremely natural and pristine.

Those who are good at management rarely use force.

Those who are good at battles rarely lose their tempers.

Those who are good at winning over their rivals never let rivals take control.

Those who are good at employing people are modest.

This is the noncompetitive virtue.

This is the use of people's abilities.

This is called the best conformation to nature and history.

A good warrior is not forceful.

A good fighter is not belligerent.

The best conqueror does not confront the enemy.

The best employer is under employees.

This is called non-striving Virtue.

This is called using the forces of others.

This is called being identified with the sublimity of old Heaven.

A good soldier is not violent.

A good fighter will not get angry.

A good winner will not always compete.

A good employer is humble.

These are, the virtues of compete (or not compete),

the way to lead people.

Since ancient times,

this has been known as an ultimate virtue.

A skilled warrior does not rush ahead of others

A skilled fighter does not make a show of anger.

A skilled victor does not seek revenge.

A skilled employer does not acr superior.

This
is known as the virtue of not competing.

This is known as making use of the abilities of others.

This is known as being united with heaven

as it was in ancient times.

The
best leaders stay with their local people

the best fighters are cool and calm

the best commanders win without engaging the enemy

the best supervisors act like the lowest employees

the best healers cure without medicine

the best laws have no transgressors

the best priests have no faith.

This is called power

power
that comes with flowing with the way

power that is able to guide people

power that is mate to the universe

the oldest power.

A skilful leader of troops is never oppressive with his military strength. The
brave soldier is hardly very violent;

The best fighter doesn't become visibly angry; he hardly loses his temper.

A skilful conqueror doesn't compete with people. The great conqueror doesn't
fight for small issues alone.

The best user of men acts as though he were their inferior and puts himself
below them by the virtue of not-competing.

This
is called the ability or capacity to use men, or matching heaven, or being suited
to the highest found principle, [maybe of old]

A good warrior is not bellicose,

A good fighter does not anger,

A good conqueror does not contest his enemy,

One who is good at using others puts himself below them.

This is called "integrity without competition,"

This is called "using others,"

This is called "parity with heaven," - the pinnacle of the ancients.

The good commander is not imperious.

The good fighter is not wrathful.

The greatest conqueror does not wage war.

The best master governs by condescension.

This is the virtue of not contending.

This is the virtue of persuasion.

This is the imitation of Heaven, and this was the highest aim of the ancients.

Play with Each Other as Do Children

Play with each other as do children.

Laugh and sing and skip.

Tumble in each other's arms

and squeal with delight.

Play games without a thought

of winning or losing.

Play with words

and make each other laugh.

Play with each other's bodies

and make each other sigh.

It is your playfulness

that makes you like the Tao.

Our culture has filled play

with effort, expense, and intensity.

Simplify your play.

You don't need expensive toys.

You don't need advanced technology.

You don't need athletic skill.

You only need each other.

A skillful leader of troops is not oppressive with his military strength. A skilful fighter does not become angry.

A skilful conqueror does not compete with people. One who is skilful in using men puts himself below them.

This is called the virtue of non-competing. This is called the
strength to use men. This is called matching Heaven, the highest
principle of old.

The best captain
does not plunge headlong

Nor is the best soldier a fellow hot to fight.

The greatest victor wins without a battle:

He who overcomes men understands them.

There is a quality of quietness

Which quickens people by no stress:

'fellowship with heaven,' as of old,

Is fellowship with man and keeps its hold.

A good general does not look intimidating,

A good fighter does not look fierce,

A good conqueror does not squabble,

A good leader is always humble.

This is the DE of not fighting with people;

This is the strength of using the power of others;

This is the state of being the most harmonic with nature.

A good warrior is never pugnacious.

A good fighter is never angry.

A good winner is never combative.

A good commander is always humble.

This is called the virtue of non-contention.

This is called using the strength of others.

This is called perfect emulation of heavenly virtue.

A true gentleman admires no martial arts.

An invincible warrior never resorts to anger.

A true winner never appears in any encounter.

A wise employer never looks superior.

Holders of the true Way struggle for nothing of their own,

And depend on resources of strength other than their own.

The best ability of all time matches that of the heaven.

The best warrior does not give free reign to violence.

The most skillful fighter will not let anger cloud his mind.

The skilful tactician wins without a battle.

A great commander overcomes men by placing himself below them.

This is known as the 'virtue of not striving'.

It is also called the ability to manage others.

This is regarded as the earthly embodiment of the way of Heaven.

