===== Chapter 48 =====

Take learning to be daily increase.

Take Tao to be daily decrease.

Decrease upon decrease—

Thereby arrive at non-action.

Non-action and not "doing":

Take the world always by non-administration.

Until this [happens], there exists administration.

[This is] not sufficient to take the world.

Pursue knowledge, gain daily. Pursue Tao, lose daily. Lose and again lose, Arrive at non-doing.

Non-doing - and nothing not done.

Take the entire world as nothing. Make the least effort, And the world escapes you.

The followers of knowledge gain something each day.

The followers of Tao lose something each day.

They lose and keep losing till they start doing nothing.

Yet though nothing is done, nothing is left undone.

If you would conquer the world, refrain from meddling.

If you meddle you cannot conquer the world.

ACHIEVING INACTIVITY

Increasing knowledge day by day,

Is the pursuit of learning.

Decreasing and simplifying day by day,

Is the pursuit of Tao.

Decreasing, subtracting, lessening, diminishing, Until inactivity is achieved.

Through this inactivity, this pure spontaneity,

All things happen - nothing is left undone.

All is won by foregoing interference with the nature of things.

The compulsion to actively manage All Things,

Brings about the loss of All Things.

You will benefit when you let the sun come through the covered mind.

Align with the Tao every day and your effort diminishes, diminishes, and diminishes.

Hence you reach a state of not doing (wu wei), not doing, and nothing but not doing.

Always without trying, take hold of Heaven below (the sacred body).

When you stop trying, you will be able to take hold of Heaven below.

OBLIVION OVERCOMING KNOWLEDGE

The scholar seeketh daily increase of knowing; the sage of Tao daily

decrease of doing.

He
decreaseth it, again and again, until he doth no act with the lust of

result. Having attained this Inertia all accomplisheth itself.

He
who attracteth to himself all that is under Heaven doth so without

effort. He who maketh effort is not able to attract it.

He who devotes himself to learning (seeks) from day to day to increase(his knowledge): he who devotes himself to the Tao (seeks) from day today to diminish (his doings). He diminishes it and again diminishes it,till he arrives at doing nothing (on purpose). Having arrived at this pointof non- action, there is nothing which he does not do. He who gets as hisown all under heaven does so by giving himself no trouble (with that end).If one take trouble (with that end), he is not equal to getting as hisall under heaven.

Gathering knowledge makes life more complicated each time one gathers

Gathering wisdom makes life easier each time one gathers

Each time, more and more simple until simplicity is reached

Just by leaving, one man can achieve everything

One who wants nothing anymore, doesn't feel the need to do a thing, has conquered oneself

One who wants a lot has to do a lot and is as a slave to oneself

While day by day the overzealous student stores up facts for future use, He who has learned to trust nature finds need for ever fewer external directions.

He will discard formula after formula, until he reaches the conclusion: Let Nature take its course. By letting each thing act in accordance with its own nature, everything that needs to be done gets done.

The best way to manage anything is by making use of its own nature; For a thing cannot function properly when its own nature has been disrupted.

Learning consists in adding to one's stock day by day;

The practice of Tao consists in "subtracting day by day,

Subtracting and yet again subtracting

Till one has reached inactivity.

But by this very inactivity

Everything can be activated."

Those who of old won the adherence of all who live under heaven

All did so not interfering.

Had they interfered,

They would never have won this adherence.

For students of knowledge,

every day something is acquired.

For observers of Tao,

every day something falls away.

Less and less is done

until not-doing is achieved.

When there is no doer,

nothing remains to be done.

The realm of heaven and earth

is ruled by timeless principles.

He who tries to interfere is not ready to receive it.

The pursuit of learning (means) increasing daily

The pursuit of the way (means) decreasing daily

Decreasing things and then subtracting

In order to arrive at not doing

(When) nothing is done, then nothing remains undone

To capture the world, always apply the least effort

As soon as one has to make effort

(One is) no longer adequate to the purpose

of capturing the world

Knowledge

Those who work at their studies

Increase day after day;

Those who have heard the Tao

Decrease day after day.

They decrease and decrease,

till they get to the point where they do nothing.

They do nothing and yet there is nothing left undone.

When someone wants to take control of the world,

He must always be unconcerned with affairs.

For in a case where he is concerned with affairs,

He will be unworthy as well,

of taking control of the world

In the pursuit of learning, every day something is added. In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped.

Less and less is done, until one arrives at nonaction. When nothing is done, nothing is left undone. The world is won by letting things take their own course.

If you still have ambitions, its out of your reach.

Pursuing knowledge: daily accumulation.

Following Tao: daily unburdening.

Decrease, diminish, deprogram:

Continue in this till power is dead.

For when action lacks force,

Nothing is left unaccomplished.

Rely upon your true eternal nature,

And you will never have to strive again.

But let your life become

A game of inner commerce,

And you will never cease with making deals;

You will never feel fulfilled-

In this or any other world.

Contrary to what a certain well-known American historical document may have implied, happiness is not best found through pursuit. Lao Tzu would like us to ask whether it makes inner sense to chase down happiness, understanding, or knowledge, as if they were external objects. Happiness is best revealed or discovered, and so is knowledge. Knowledge that is accumulated in the form of facts, statistics, and quotations from the "Masters" is every bit as obstructive as the accumulation of material goods with which many people seem to clutter their lives and homes.

Lao Tzu's alternative is "daily unburdening:" the regular and unrelenting inner deprogramming of the trappings of ego—intellectual clutter, degrees and diplomas, memorized formulae of theory and law, and the underlying assumption of the primacy and royalty of intellect among the various functions of the psyche. You can deprogram these errors by denying them their false claim to truth; and in this, the process of discovering the living wisdom of Tao is already underway.

The benefits of this process are synergistic: as your understanding of your natural position in the cosmic order broadens, so does that of your intellectual function within your own psyche. And once intellect is knocked off its false throne, it works far more comfortably and efficiently, because it is no longer the lonely and reluctant tyrant of the psyche. For now the intellect is a fully functioning member of the total personality, and when a person discovers his natural wholeness, nothing is wanting: therefore, the "game of inner commerce" can be gratefully abandoned.

When your inner treasure is complete, there is nothing to gain, and the bubble of pursuit is burst, along with its insatiable thirst for the fulfillment that is always just beyond its reach. Until that bubble is exploded, we cannot escape the vicious cycle of making deals on the superficial plane—deals in which our own true nature is turned into a mere commodity.

The scholar needs to know more and more each day.

The follower of Tao needs to know less and less each day.

By
lessening knowledge one reaches inaction.

By inaction everything can be done.

The
world is won by those who leave it alone.

When one feels compelled to dominate,

the world is already beyond reach.

The pursuit of study bring daily increase; the pursuit of Tao brings daily decrease; decrease upon decrease, until non-action is reached, whence all action proceeds.

Only continued non-concern will win the Empire; where there is concern there is an insufficiency for the task.

He who pursues learning will increase every day;

He who pursues Tao will decrease every day.

He will decrease and continue to decrease,

Till he comes to non-action;

By non-action everything can be done.

Forgetting

In deem-acting on 'study' one daily increases.

In deem-acting on 'the guide ' one daily decreases.

Decrease it and further decrease it.

In order to arrive at no deem-acting.

No deem-acting and nothing not deem-acted.

Taking the social world , you treat relying on lacking social acts as constant.

When it comes to engaging in social acts,

it is not sufficient for taking the social world.

To learn,

One accumulates day by day.

To study Tao,

One reduces day by day.

Through reduction and further reduction

One reaches non-action,

And everything is acted upon.

Therefore, one often wins over the world

Through non-action.

Through action, one may not win over the world.

In the course of learning, one increases every day.

In the course of Tao, one decreases every day.

Decreasing and decreasing, until doing nothing.

Doing nothing, yet everything is done.

That is why he who aims at rulership should let things take their course.

Should he try to interfere, he is not worthy of aiming at rulership.

He who pursues learning daily increases;

He who hears the Tao daily decreases.

He decreases and decreases

Until he acts not

And has no intention to act.

He who wishes to win all under heaven

Never creates disturbances.

If he creates disturbances,

He is no longer fit to win all under heaven.

The person who pursues his studies

Will be wiser with every passing day,

The person who seeks the Tao

Will decrease with every passing day.

Less and less, he will continue to decrease,

Until he reaches the state of non-action,

And by non-action it is possible to do everything.

Li Chia-mou said:

"He who pursues learning acquires knowledge; he who seeks the Tao casts off his ignorance.

The more the person knows, the more he has to get rid of.

Therefore, adding means nothing more than decreasing."

In the pursuit of learning one knows more every day;

In the pursuit of the way one does less every day.

One does less and less until one does nothing at all, and when one does nothing
at all there is nothing that is undone.

It
is always through not meddling that the empire is won.

Should you meddle, then you are not equal to the task of winning the empire.

Forgetting Knowledge

He who seeks learnedness will daily increase. He who seeks Reason will daily diminish. He will diminish and continue to diminish until he arrives at non-assertion.

With non-assertion there is nothing that he cannot achieve. When he takes the empire, it is always because he uses no diplomacy. He who uses diplomacy is not fit to take the empire.

You learn something everyday through knowledge. You unlearn something everyday experiencing the Tao. Unlearn more and more until you know. Then there is no doer, thus nothing to do. Doing nothing, let things take their natural course. Try to do something and you will miss.

Aiming at study, one's avarice gains day by day;

Aiming at Direction, one's avarice loses day by day.

Losing [avarice] upon losing [avarice], one ends with laissez-faire.

Laissez-faire permeates everything.

To govern the world, one always practices laissez-faire.

Without laissez-faire, one is unfit to govern the world.

To work at learning brings more each day.

To work at Way brings less each day,

less and still less

until you're doing nothing yourself.

And when you're doing nothing yourself, there's nothing you don't do.

To grasp all beneath heaven, leave it alone.

Leave it alone, that's all,

and nothing in all beneath heaven will elude you.

Pursuing learning, one needs to learn more every day.

Practicing Tao, one needs to do less every day.

Less and even less, one reaches a state of taking no action.

Taking no action but nothing is left undone.

Taking over an empire must always be a nonevent.

If eventful, it is unworthy of taking over the empire.

Act
academic, daily gain

Act tao, daily lose.

Losing, again lose

It happens, reaching relating to the absence of acting

Absence of acting yet absence of being without acting.

Grabbing
the world, an entire absence of effort happens

Liking entirely the presence of effort

Is insufficient to precede grabbing the world.

By studying, every day one increases (useless and injurious particular notions, in one's memory); by concentrating on the Principle, they are diminished every day.

Pushed to the limit, this diminution ends in non-action, (the consequence of the absence of particular ideas). Now there is nothing that non-action (letting things go) cannot sort out. It is through non-action that one wins the empire.

To act, in order to win it, results in failure.

Pursue knowledge, daily gain

Pursue Tao, daily loss

Loss and more loss

Until one reaches non-action

With non-action, there is nothing one cannot do

Take the world by constantly applying non-interference

The one who interferes is not qualified to take the world

When we pursue academic study, each day we gain book knowledge, which leads to more complexity and ever-increasing desires. The more we know, the more things we want.

When we pursue the Tao, each day we reduce, detach, discard and simplify. We lose more and more complexity every day. As a result, our desires will also decrease. A simple and uncluttered life leads to peace and contentment.

This process of reduction and simplication continues, until we reach wu wei - the state that is free of striving and without any unnecessary effort.

With the principle of wu wei - achievement without strife and with effortless grace - there is nothing we cannot accomplish. The impossible becomes possible; the difficult becomes easy. We do less and accomplish more.

Using this principle, we allow all things to progress naturally and minimize our meddling interference. This is the most effective way for us to achieve our goals and objectives in the world.

Those who do not understand this aspect of the Tao cannot let things be. They insist upon asserting their manipulative influence. Their lack of understand will lead to the expenditure of excessive resources, time and energy, but not the results proportional to their effort.

TO FORGET KNOWLEDGE

He who attends daily to learning increases in learning. He who practices Tao daily diminishes. Again and again he humbles himself. Thus he attains to non-doing (wu wei). He practices non-doing and yet there is nothing left undone.

To command the empire one must not employ craft. If one uses craft he is not fit to command the empire.

To pursue (wei) learning one increases daily.

To pursue (wei) Tao one decreases daily.

To decrease and again to decrease,

Until one arrives at not doing (wu-wei).

Not doing (wu-wei) and yet nothing is not done.

Always take the empire when there are no businesses.

If there are businesses,

It is not worthwhile to take the empire.

The scholar needs to know more and more each day. The follower of Tao needs to know less and less each day. By lessening knowledge one reaches serenity. With serenity everything can be done. The world is won by those who leave it alone. When one feels compelled to dominate, the world is already beyond reach.

Pursue learning, gain daily.

Follow the Tao, lose daily.

By losing day–by–day, you arrive at non–ado.

Nothing done, nothing left undone.

Master the world by letting things be,

by letting them take their own course.

The world can't be conquered.

Forty-eight

In the pursuit of learning, every day something is acquired.

In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped.

Less and less is done

Until non-action is achieved.

When nothing is done, nothing is left undone.

The
world is ruled by letting things take their course.

It cannot be ruled by interfering.

He who seeks learning must increase his knowledge every day;

He who seeks the Tao must reduce his knowledge every day;

He reduces and reduces until he reaches the state of inaction.

When reaching the state of inaction, one can succeeds in everything.

To govern the world well, one must take inaction as the principle.

If one governs with too much action, one is not a worthy governor.

When you pursue learning, you gain day by day.

When you pursue Tao, you lose day by day.

You lose more and more,

Until you reach thereby the point of no-action.

You do nothing yet leave nothing undone.

You take all under Heaven

Always through no activity.

Should you rely on activity,

You will find it insufficient to take all under Heaven.

In the pursuit of knowledge, your rapacity increases every day.

In the pursuit of Dao, your desire decreases daily.

It will continue to decrease until it reaches a state of wu-wei.

Adhering to non-action, you can accomplish everything easily.

You must stick to the principle of non-interference in order to rule a nation.

Once you become meddlesome, you become unfit to govern a nation.

Forgetting Knowledge

Wang Chih

To learn, one increases day by day;

To cultivate Tao, one reduces day by day.

Reduce and reduce and keep on reducing,

Till the state of non-action is reached.

With non-action there is nothing that cannot be done.

Therefore, he who wins the world

Always resorts to non-action.

Once he resorts to action,

He will not be qualified to win the world.

He who goes in search of knowledge adds to himself day after day;

He who seeks the Tao sheds something form himself day after day,

Shedding more and more,

Until he attains Non-action.

By Non-acton there is nothing that cannot be done.

The Kingdom can only be achieved by not interfering;

Those who busy themselves interferingly are not capable pf achieveing the Kingdom.

To get learning, add to it daily.

To get Tao, subtract daily.

Subtract and subtract

Until you achieve nothing-doing.

Do nothing-doing

And everything will get done.

To win beneath-heaven

Always avoid fussing.

If fussing is not avoided,

Beneath heaven is not won.

Learning builds daily accumulation,

but the practice of the Way of spiritual integration with the subtle essence of the universe builds daily simplification.

Simplify and simplify, until all contamination from relative, contradictory thinking is eliminated.

Then one does nothing, yet nothing is left undone.

One who wins the world does so by not meddling with it.

One who meddles with the world loses it.

XLVIII.

Neglecting
Knowledge

Striving
for learning one gains a daily addition,

Using
the Tao there follows a daily remission,

And
as the work lessens and lessens there comes a condition

Of
nothing doing, when nothing is left to do.

He
who wo4rtld take as his own all the realm under heaven,

Accomplishes
it when no trouble is taken or given,

If
trouble he use, by trouble itself he is driven,

And
unfitted thereby to take what he seeks to pursue.

By activity in learning we are daily enriched.

By activity of Tao we are daily diminished, diminished and yet more diminished, until we arrive at activity of Inner Life, and activity of Inner Life becomes stillness of Inner Life.

By the practice of Inner Life stillness we can continually conquer all things.

By the practice of returning to possessions, nothing that we conquer will be sufficient for us.

Rote Learning

involves daily

getting more;

The practice of Tao

(the Laws of the Universe)

involves daily

getting rid of.

Keep on

getting rid of and

getting rid of,

Until you reach

the state of Effortlessness.

Effortlessness and

nothing is

left undone.

To win the world,

give up all.

If you

still have

private goals,

You

will never

win

the world.

Practice learning and there is daily increase.

Practice the Way and there is daily decrease.

Decrease, and again decrease, till it reaches non-action.

By doing nothing there is nothing that is not done.

He who devotes himself to learning (seeks) from day to day to

increase (his knowledge); he who devotes himself to the Tao (seeks)

from day to day to diminish (his doing).

He
diminishes it and again diminishes it, till he arrives at doing

nothing (on purpose). Having arrived at this point of non-action,

there is nothing which he does not do.

He
who gets as his own all under heaven does so by giving himself

no trouble (with that end). If one take trouble (with that end), he

is not equal to getting as his own all under heaven.

The pursuit of learning results in daily increase.
Hearing DEI-ty results
in daily decrease!
Decrease and more Decrease,
until you reach Doing
Nothing Much Personal.
Through this, no action is left undone.

Should
one aspire to attain the Cosmos,
one should remain ever free of Ego-involvements;

For,
just as surely as one becomes Ego-involved,
one becomes unfit
to attain the Cosmos.

In
going after learning

Something's added every day

For resting in the ultimate

Everything must drop away

Day
by day do less and less

Until nothingness is seen

All occurs quite on its own

A doer need not intervene

Allow
all things to run their course

If you want to be proficient

Make a fuss and bother

And existence will be insufficient

LEARNING consists in daily accumulating;

The practice of Tao consists in daily diminishing.

Keep on diminishing and diminishing,

Until you reach the state of Non-Ado.

No-Ado, and yet nothing is left undone.

To win the world, one must renounce all.

If one still has private ends to serve,

One will never be able to win the world.

Common learning consists in adding something new each day,

In pursuit of the Tao, every day something is dropped.

Day after day something else is lost, until one reaches the point where one is able to do much by doing nothing.

Less and less you know and desire, until you reach the state of non-action.

By not striving to control the world, it offers itself to you.

You cannot master the world by trying to enforce change on it.

One who seeks knowledge learns something new every day.

One who seeks the Tao unlearns something new every day.

Less and less remains until you arrive at non-action.

When you arrive at non-action,

nothing will be left undone.

Mastery
of the world is achieved

by letting things take their natural course.

You can not master the world by changing the natural way.

Beginners acquire new theories and techniques until their minds are cluttered with options.

Advanced students forget their many options. They allow the theories and techniques that they have learned to recede into the background.

Learn to unclutter your mind. Learn to simplify your work.

As you rely less and less on knowing just what to do, your work will become more direct and more powerful. You will discover that the quality of your consciousness is more potent than any technique or theory or interpretation.

Learn how to be fruitful the blocked group or individual suddenly becomes when you give up trying to do just the right thing.

To pursue learning is to grow a little more every day.

To pursue the Tao is to desire a little less every day.

Desire less and less

Unti you arrive at "not-doing."

When you practice "not-doing," nothing is left undone.

If you want to have the whole world,

Have nothing.

If you are always busy doing something,

You cannot enjoy the world.

l

In
the pursuit of knowledge,

at every moment something is distinguished.

In the pursuit of peace and harmony,

at every moment something is merged.

Less and less is desired

until one is flowing in peace and harmony.

When one is flowing in peace and harmony

all things are accomplished.

The
world flows in peace and harmony

when all things are allowed to

manifest and to disintegrate.

Peace
and harmony are sacrificed

by manipulation.

By learning, each day brings increase.

With Tao, each day brings decrease.

Less and less, until there is nothing at all to do.

Nothing to do and nothing left undone.

To truly gain the World, do without affairs.

One who has affairs is not content until he has gained the World.

In pursuit of knowledge, something new is learned every day.

In pursuit of the Tao, something is abandoned every day.

Do less and less

Until non-action is achieved.

Do nothing, and nothing remains undone.

All things can be accomplished by not acting.

The empire can never be governed by taking action.

Those who approach being academically

Will become filled in mind day by day.

Those who approach non-being for the Way

Will become freed in mind day by day.

When one is freed of all wanton ideas and desires

One arrives at the state of no willful action.

One who does nothing out of personal will

Can achieve all purposes at the same time.

It is only when no willful actions are needed,

That one can win the world.

When a person must act willfully to achieve a purpose,

That person has not the sufficient conditions to be a leader.

"Doing Learning, one profits everyday." Doing Tao, one suffers a loss everyday -

loses, and loses some more and so arrives at not doing anything. Doing nothing, nothing will remain not done. Taking over the world: only by not working.

A person who sets to working, doesn't have what it takes to take over the world.

He who learns increases his knowledge every day. He who serves Tao decreases his worldly desires. In constant decrease of worldly desires, man can achieve non-doing.

In non-doing one can master all mysteries of the universe! Without non-doing one cannot achieve this.

Going on the path of the world, things are multiplying.

Going on the Tao Way, things are diminishing.

By having less and less things, the source of emptiness can be reached.

By
movement, things are out of their natural way,

Thus, work is necessary to put them in balance.

On the Tao Way things are already in equilibrium,

Thus action isn't necessary.

One
who engages in study is daily increased. One who engages in the Dao is daily
diminished. Diminish and once again diminish until there is no activity. When
there is no activity there is nothing that will not be done. One always takes
the world by means of not meddling. When one meddles then one is inadequate
to take the world.

The pursuit of learning increases daily.

The pursuit of Tao decreases daily,

Decreasing more and more

Until it reaches the point of inaction.

Inaction: then nothing cannot be done by it,

Therefore the capture of the world should always be done by inactivity.

As for activity, it is insufficient to capture the world.

The Art of Nonaction

To pursue the academic, add to it daily.

To pursue the Tao, subtract from it daily.

Subtract and subtract again,

To arrive at nonaction.

Through nonaction nothing is left undone.

The world is always held wtihout effort.

The moment there is effort,

The world is beyond holding.

The knowledgeable have volumes of great works. The wise walk in the tall grasses. The knowledgeable have more research to do; their work is never complete. The wise have nothing to do. The day unfolds on its' own.

The student learns by daily increment.

The Way is gained by daily loss,

Loss upon loss until

At last comes rest.

By
letting go, it all gets done;

The world is won by those who let it go!

But when you try and try,

The world is then beyond the winning.

The pursuit of learning is to increase (knowledge) day after day.

The pursuit of Tao is to decrease (knowledge) day after day.

Decreasing and decreasing again, till one has reached nonaction (wu-wei).

Nonaction and yet there is nothing that is not done by it.

To govern all under Heaven one usually should not take any arbitrary action.

If one tends to do anything arbitrarily,

One is not qualified to govern all under Heaven.

The pursuit of learning means having more each day,

But the pursuit of the Dao means having less each day.

Having less upon having less, eventually one reaches the point where one engages in no conscious action, yet nothing remains undone.

One who takes all under Heaven as his charge always tends to matters without deliberate action.

But when it comes to one who does take conscious action,

Such a one is not worthy to take all under Heaven as his charge.

1. Those who work at their studies increase day after day;

2. Those who have heard the Dao decrease day after day.

3. They decrease and decrease, till they get to the point where they do nothing.

4. They do nothing and yet there's nothing left undone.

5. When someone wants to take control of the world, he must always be unconcerned
with affairs.

6. For in a case where he's concerned with affairs,

7. He'll be unworthy, as well, of taking control of the world.

Usually,

we try to learn something new every day.

But if we want
to get right with Tao,

we have to let go of something every day.

We do less and
less,

until we end up doing nothing.

And it's when we do nothing

that we get the job done.

Let events take
their course,

and everything will turn out

in your favor.

If you act on your ambitions,

they will never pan out.

.

Doing Less

The pursuit of learning is to increase day by day.

The practice of the Way is to decrease day by day.

Less and less is done until one reaches non-action.

When nothing is done, nothing is left undone.

The world is led by not interfering.

Those who interfere cannot lead the world.

He who strives after learning increases daily.

He who follows his essence decreases daily.

He reduces his doing until not-doing is reached.

By not-doing nothing remain undone.

Because not-doing wins the empire which refuses itself to doing.

Govern The World By No Business

Lao Tze says,

He who devotes himself to learning from day to day increases his knowledge.

He who devotes himself to the Tao from day to day diminishes his intention.

He diminishes it and again diminishes it, till he arrives at doing without intention.

Having arrived at this point of doing without intention, there is nothing left undone.

He who manages the world's affairs does so by giving himself no trouble.

If he troubles himself, he is not qualified to manage the world's affairs.

FORGETTING KNOWLEDGE

When
pursuing knowledge,

something new is acquired each day.

But when pursuing the way of the Tao,

something is subtracted;

less striving occurs,

until there is no striving.

When
effort is uncontrived,

nothing is left undone;

the way of nature rules

by allowing things to take their course,

not by contriving to change.

In pursuit of knowledge,

every day something is added.

In the practice of the Tao,

every day something is dropped.

Less and less do you need to force things,

until finally you arrive at non-action.

When nothing is done,

nothing is left undone.

True mastery can be gained

by letting things go their own way.

It can't be gained by interfering.

To learn daily will increase desires.

To follow Dao will daily reduce desires.

Reduce and reduce desires until there is no coveting.

Dao contrives nothing yet it provides everything.

Therefore to lead the world is to be persistently with no intervention.

If there is any intervention, it will be impossible to lead the world.

Having a zest for learning yields an increase day by day.

Hearing the Tao brings a loss day by day.

Losing more and more until inaction results.

Inaction results, yet everything is done.

Managing the world always involves nonengagement.

As soon as there is engagement, there is never enough of it to manage the world.

XLVIII

To
practice most things means to gain a little skill,every day

To practice the tao means to lose a little

Lose a little of this and a little of that until one has no skill left at anything

And then nothing will ever be left undone

If you want to lead, forget what leadership should be

If you can't forget the shoulds

You will always find someone to oppose you

For Learning You Gain Daily

For learning you gain daily;

for the Way you lose daily.

Losing and losing,

thus you reach noncontrivance;

be uncontrived, and nothing is not done.

Taking the world is always done

by not making anything of it.

For when something is made of it,

that is not enough to take the world.

Studying can be of benefit from day to day.

Following Tao one uses less force day after day.

Less and less, one uses no force.

Yet, he succeeds in everything.

To govern the world, one interferes nothing.

If he interferes, he is unqualified to govern the world.

By learning, one advances day by day.

By practicing the Way, one reduces day by day.

Reducing and reducing, until you reach the state of non-doing.

Non-doing, and yet not not doing.

To win over the world, one must "have no work".

If one still has work, one will never be able to win over the world.

In the pursuit of learning, every day something is acquired.

In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped.

More and more dropped, until Wu-Wei is achieved.

With Wu-Wei, nothing is left undone.

The world always takes its own course.

If not, it cannot rule the world.

In the pursuit of learning,

every day something isadded.

In the pursuit of the Tao,

every day something is dropped.

Less
and less is done

until you come to action with striving.

When you follow this practice,

nothing remains undone.

All
under heaven is won by

letting things take their cuurse.

Nothing can be gained by interfering.

Learning
means accumulating something every day.

ollowing the way

means losing something every day.

Loss followed by loss

until everything is gone

and nothing

is to be done

and everything

is accomplished.

Win
by letting things take their natural course

lose by interfering.

The student of knowledge goes into learning a little day by day;

The student of dao reduces his assets by dwindling or losing a bit each day.

Learning consists in adding daily to one's stock, and the practice of dao consists
in loose dwindling day by day. It could be subtracting till one has reached
inactivity. By steady reductions [of certain sorts] you reach certain sorts
of laissez-faire. So decrease and further decrease until you reach the point
of taking no action.

[This is clowning.] By artful inactivity everything [bad] can be set in motion.

He who conquers the [inside] domain does so [mostly] by doing nothing. Those
who once won the adherence of all who live here, did so by not interfering much.

Had they interfered, they would never have won this adherence.

One who likes to do, may not be able to rule a kingdom [inside or outside].

The pursuit of learning results in daily increase,

Hearing the Way leads to daily decrease.

Decrease and again decrease, until you reach nonaction.

Through nonaction, no action is left undone.

Should one desire to gain all under heaven,

One should remain ever free of involvements.

For,

Just as surely as one becomes involved,

One is unfit for gaining all under heaven.

Bodily and mental distress is increased every day in the effort to get knowledge.

But this distress is daily diminished by the getting of Tao.

Do you continually curtail your effort till there be nothing left of it?

By non-action there is nothing which cannot be effected.

A man might, without the least distress, undertake the government of the world.

But those who distress themselves about governing the world are not fit for it.

Subtraction Can Add

In pursuit of the perfect relationship

people add each day more and more things to their lives,

hoping that one day they will have what they need.

But in your love you have discovered

that less and less is needed.

You subtract daily from the things that distract.

One day you discover that you have always had

everything you ever needed.

The question, ''What do I need

in order to be happy?" is difficult to answer.

Careers are good, children are a gift,

money is useful, health is a blessing,

but what is essential?

Talk with each other about it.

Perhaps less than you think.

The pursuit of learning is to increase day after day. The pursuit of Tao is to decrease day after day.

It is to decrease and further decrease until one reaches the point of
taking no action. No action is undertaken, And yet nothing is left
undone. An empire is often brought to order by having no activity.

If one (likes to) undertake activity, he is not qualified to govern the empire.

A man anxious
for knowledge adds more to himself every minute;

A man acquiring life loses himself in it,

Has less and less to bear in mind,

Less and less to do,

Because life, he finds, is well inclined,

Including himself too.

Often a man sways the world like a wind

But not by deed;

And if there appear to you to be need

Of motion to sway it, it has left you behind.

The more you study a subject, the more you know;

the more you study the DAO, the less you know;

Less and less, until at the end you achieve WUWEI.

By WUWEI, you can accomplish everything.

If you want to govern a country, always try to let nothing happen;

If you make things happen, you are not suitable for governing the country.

The practice of ordinary learning increases complexity daily.

The practice of the Tao increases simplicity daily.

Simplicity leads to more simplicity,

Until it reaches the state of pristine nonaction.

Then nothing is done, yet nothing remains undone.

Thus, one who wins the world does so

By not meddling with it, through nonaction, with simplicity.

One who loses the world does so

By meddling with it, through action, with complexity.

Those who approach being academically

Will become filled in mind day by day.

Those who approach non-being for the Way

Will become freed in mind day by day.

When one is freed of all wanton ideas and desires

One arrives at the state of no willful action.

One who does nothing out of personal will

Can achieve all purposes at the same time.

It is only when no willful actions are needed,

That one can win the world.

When a person must act willfully to achieve a purpose,

That person has not the sufficient conditions to be a leader.

Common learning consists in adding something new each day,

In pursuit of the Tao, every day something is dropped.

Day after day something else is lost,

until one reaches the point where one is able to do much by doing nothing.

Less and less you know and desire, until you reach the state of non-action.

By not striving to control the world, it offers itself to you.

You cannot master the world by trying to enforce change on it.

