===== Chapter 42 =====

The Tao gives birth to One

One gives birth to Two

Two gives birth to Three

The three give birth to the ten-thousand things.

The ten-thousand things take refuge in yin but harbor yang

Infusing ch'i in order to act in harmony.

That which is detested among people:

Only [being] orphaned, bereft, unfortunate.

Yet kings are indifferent to being [thus] called.

Therefore, beings might decry them

And yet [they are] profited.

Might profit them and yet [they are] decried.

That which is taught among people—

I also teach it:

Those who are swelling with violence

Do not conquer their death.

I will therefore take [these] teachings as [my] father.

Tao engenders One, One engenders Two, Two engenders Three, Three engenders the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry shade And embrace sunlight. Shade and sunlight, yin and yang, Breath blending into harmony.

Humans hate To be alone, poor, and hungry. Yet kings and princes Use these words as titles.

We gain by losing, Lose by gaining.

What others teach, I also teach: "A violent man does not die a natural death. This is the basis of my teaching.

Tao gave birth to the One.

One gave birth to the Two.

Two gave birth to the Three.

The Three gave birth to the myriad things.

The myriad things have their backs in shadows

Their faces bask in the light.

Through the blending of life forces they achieve harmony.

"orphaned," "lonely" and "worthless"

Are conditions which people detest

Yet the nobles describe themselves with those names.

Thus sometimes by losing we gain.

And sometimes by gaining we lose.

What others teach I also teach:

"The violent have earned their death."

This is the source of my teaching.

ONE, TWO, THREE, MANY

One, an undifferentiated unity, Comes from the Tao.

One, differentiated, becomes two - Yin and Yang, I and Not I.

Thence, are three realized - Such are Te, Ch'i and Shen.

And from three, All Things arise.

Of All Things -

In carrying the Yin and embracing the Yang,

Through the blending of these energies, Harmony is achieved.

People disdain being orphaned, needy and worthless,

Yet leaders and rulers, to appear humble, have so named themselves.

By diminishing themselves, they often gain -

By overt attempts to gain, they often lose.

As the ancient spiritual teachers have said,

The person living by violence,

Shall surely die by violence.

The Tao gives birth to one.

The one gives birth to two.

The two gives birth to three.

The three gives birth to ten-thousand things (everything).

Ten-thousand things carry the yin (the physical) and hold the yang (the spiritual) within.

The collision of these two vital forces (the chi) creates the totality that is humanity.

Widows and orphans can connect Heaven, Humanity and Earth.

The ministers who disdain them make titles for themselves.

Sometimes things decrease and there is a gain.

Sometimes with an increase, there is a loss.

The lessons of others are also my lessons.

The lessons of the forceful and aggressive do not create the necessary death.

I receive each lesson, thus making it a beginning.

THE VEILS OF THE TAO

The Tao formulated the One. The One exhaled the Two.

The Two were parents of the Three. The Three were parents of all things.

All things pass from Obscurity to Manifestation, inspired harmoniously by

the Breath of the Void.

Men
do not like to be fatherless, virtueless, unworthy: yet rulers

describe themselves by these names. Thus increase bringeth decrease to

some, and decrease bringeth increase to others.

Others
have taught thus; I consent to it. Violent men and strong die not

by natural death. This fact is the foundation of my law.

The Tao produced One; One produced Two; Two produced Three; Three producedall things. All things leave behind them the obscurity (out of which theyhave come), and go forward to embrace the Brightness (into which they haveemerged), while they are harmonised by the Breath of Vacancy. What mendislike is to be orphans, to have little virtue, to be as carriages withoutnaves; and yet these are the designations which kings and princes use forthemselves. So it is that some things are increased by being diminished,and others are diminished by being increased. What other men (thus) teach,I also teach. The violent and strong do not die their natural death. Iwill make this the basis of my teaching.

The unspeakable gives birth to one

One to a second

And out of the second arises the third

The third brings the whole creation to life

Everything is carried by the dark and comes to light

The breath of Emptiness creates order

People hate to be alone, unimportant and useless

And yet that is what a true man takes pleasure in

One who becomes smaller, becomes bigger

One who becomes bigger, becomes smaller

I only tell what everybody already knows:

One who lives in a complicated way, dies in a complicated way

That is what it's all about

Nature first begets one thing. The one thing begets another. The two produce a third. In this way, all things are begotten.

Why? Because all things are impregnated by two alternating tendencies, the tendency towards completion and the tendency towards initiation, which acting together, complement each other.

Most men dislike to be considered of no account, lowly, unworthy. Yet intelligent leaders call themselves thus.

For people are admired for their humility and despised for their pride.

There are many other ways of illustrating what I am teaching: "Extremists reach untimely ends." This saying may be taken as a good example.

Tao gave birth to the One;

The One gave birth successively to two things,

Three things, up to ten thousand.

These ten thousand creatures cannot turn their backs to the shade

Without having the sun on their bellies,

And it is on this blending of the breaths that their harmony depends.

To be orphaned, needy, ill-provided is what men most hate;

Yet princes and dukes style themselves so.

Truly, "things are often increased by seeking to diminish them

And diminished by seeking to increase them."

The maxims that others use in their teaching I too will use in mine.

Show me a man of violence that came to a good end,

And I will take him for my teacher.

From Tao, One arises.

From One, two.

From two, three.

Three becomes the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry yin on their backs

and hold yang in their arms.

Existence depends on the two.

Men hate to be orphaned, bereft, unworthy,

yet this is how the noble man describes himself.

Loss is gain, gain is loss.

I teach what has always been taught:

"A fervent man is surprised by death."

I see this as the foundation of my teaching.

The way begets the one

The one begets the two

The two beget the three

The three beget the myriad beings

The myriad beings carry the shadow and embrace the light

Mixing the breaths with harmonious action

People have their reasons to truly dislike being

"Orphaned & friendless, without worth"

Yet sovereign & duke take (these) as titles

Since beings may sometimes lose something, and yet benefit

May sometimes gain something, and yet be diminished

What someone else has taught

I too come to teach:

Those who are forceful & hostile

do not meet their (natural) ends

I will regard (this) as a premise of the teaching

Harmony

The Tao gave birth to the One.

The One gave birth to the Two.

The Two gave birth to Three.

And the Three gave birth to the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry Yin on their backs

and embrace Yang.

Through the blending of Ch'i

They achieve a state of harmony .

The things that are hated in the whole world

Are to be orphaned, widowed and worthless.

Yet Kings and lords take these as their names.

Thus with all things - some are increased by taking away;

While some are diminished by adding on.

Therefore, what other men teach,

I will also consider and then teach to others.

Thus, the strong and violent do not come to a natural end.

I will take this as the father of my studies.

Nonbeing gives birth to the oneness. The oneness gives birth to yin and yang. Yin and Yang give birth to heaven, earth, and beings. Heaven, earth, and beings give birth to everything in existence.

Therefore everything in existence carries within it both yin and yang, and attains its harmony by blending together these two vital breaths.

Ordinary people hate nothing more than to be powerless, small, and unworthy. Yet this is how superior people describe themselves.

Gain is loss. Loss is gain.

I repeat what others have said: The strong and violent don't die natural deaths. This is the very essence of my teaching.

From out of the Cosmic Consciousness

Arose the One.

Then from the One came Two.

And from Two came Three.

From the great Three came

The endless compressions of Being.

Each compressed form bears yin behind

And holds yang before it.

At the still point in the center

These complementary energies merge,

And harmony is thus realized.

Why does hatred fill the hearts of men

At the sight of poverty and solitude,

When the greatest leaders make these their name?

Perhaps increase and loss

Are not always what they seem.

Perhaps life and death

Are not truly opposed.

Here is a teaching that others before me have known:

To conceive death as against Nature-

As a cold termination of Life-

Is the distorted perspective

Of a violent inner tyranny.

A correct knowledge of death

Is itself the father of all understanding.

This is all I have to teach.

Here is one of Lao Tzu's paradoxical and oft-misunderstood verses. Of particular interest is the apparent reference to royalty's time-honored habit of making a pretence of orphan birth or poverty: how does this justify a neutral attitude toward impoverishment and loneliness?

When he writes about "poverty and solitude," Lao Tzu is making a metaphorical statement about the inner meaning, and sometimes the outer perception, of the way of diminishment, which he refers to throughout the book. Poverty, in this context, is about making ego poor, and isolating its false ideas and ideological rigidities: this creates the understanding that makes the leadership of the true self possible. It is then that the bipolar lies of ideology are revealed, and the natural principle of complementarity awakens to awareness. Life and death are not enemies—no more so than are winter and summer, or the two sides of your brain.

In this context, it is also worth noting the appearance of the terms "yin" and "yang" in the text—this is their only moment on Lao Tzu's poetic stage. It is worth considering that these terms may well have been added into this verse by subsequent editors or commentators, long after Lao Tzu's death. These words, yin and yang, have become so well known that they hardly need translation except in the way of clarifying the mistaken associations that have been laden onto them. You have probably encountered this: yang is light, male, strong, creative, active, solar, etc., and yin is dark, female, weak, passive, lunar, etc. The common relationship that is established between these two is of diametric opposition, or, at best, of a rather intransigent or reluctant complementarity.

This, clearly, is not Lao Tzu's meaning in using these terms (if Lao Tzu actually wrote them); nor is he establishing some sort of cosmic hierarchy in the discussion of the relationships between the Cosmic Whole, the One, the Two, and the Three. Lao Tzu has no interest in hierarchies: this entire book is dedicated to the inner demolition of hierarchical thought and belief. Ask either a mathematician or a poet whether one number is better than or superior to another, and you will be met with laughter.

In order to understand Lao Tzu, we will have to disperse some of our notions about what is meant in the relationship between one that gives birth and the one that is born, and about the "top down" ordering of numerical relationship (i.e., number one is "above" number two, and so on). The poet speaks of the Cosmic Consciousness as being beyond form and number; he adds that from this Presence came the One. What could this One be?

It seems we need to recall that this is a poem about death—not about death as the termination of life, but as transformation between form and non-form. In that context, it appears appropriate to consider that the One is the transformative action of Tao—its ability to continue the flow of life in energy-consciousness that is transformed from one state to another, and perhaps back again. In this light, we can also think of the Two as light and dark, the Cosmic energies of form and non-form. The Three must then be a mediating Presence, a set of Cosmic Principles that choreograph the dance between the light and dark energies and their manifestations in the "endless compressions of being."

These three dancers have been identified by Carol Anthony and Hanna Moog, in their book, I Ching: The Oracle of the Cosmic Way as the principles of Modesty, Equality, and Uniqueness (see Part I of that text, p. 39). These are the "great Three" that pervade the Cosmic Harmonic and each of the "endless compressions of being." Each compression is qualitatively equal to all the others, and each is unique in its autonomy. This is why the principle of Modesty is natural and necessary: Modesty is the principle discussed in Hexagram 15 of the I Ching, and here in Lao Tzu, wherever he speaks of Te (see, for example, Chapters 38 and 39). The principles are no more hierarchical than are the two ventricles of your heart (which one do you prefer?).

Thus, the Cosmic Consciousness, in its spontaneous expression as the One, the Two, and the Three, along with the numberless forms that arise from it, dances to its own pure and primordial music. Lao Tzu called that music Tao; it can also be named Love.

Out of Tao comes Unity; out of Unity comes two;

from two comes three; from three all things come.

The
shade of Yin is on the back of everything;

the light of Yang is on the face of everything.

From their blending together

balance exists in the world.

To
feel unworthy, to be alone, orphaned,

is greatly feared and disliked,

yet statesmen claim these feelings.

Loss sometimes benefits; benefits can be a loss.

Others
have taught this too:

the violent meet violent ends.

This is a good teaching.

The Tao produced the One. The One produced two; the two produced three; the three produced all things.

Everything is permeated by the yin and the yang and vivified by the immaterial breath.

That which men hate is to be kithless, friendless and considered unworthy, but princes and dukes thus style themselves. Form this it would appear that advantages are disadvantageous, and disadvantages are advantageous.

I teach what others have taught.

The violent and the fierce do no live out their years.

I shall be chief among the teachers.

Tao begets one; one begets two; two begets three; three begets all things. All things are backed by the Shade, (yin) and faced by the light (yang), and harmonised by the immaterial Breath (ch'i).

What others teach, I also teach: 'The daring and violent do not die a natural death.' This (maxim) I shall regard as my instructor.

Generating Things

A guide generates 'one.'

'One' generates 'two.'

'Two' generates 'three.'

'Three' generates the ten-thousand natural kinds.

The ten-thousand natural kinds bear Yin and embrace Yang.

Blend the life-forces and deem-make 'harmony.'

What humans revile

is specifically 'orphan,' 'lonely' and 'impoverished.'

Yet Kings and Dukes deem them as titles.

Hence among natural kinds: sometimes you diminish it and it increases.

Sometime you increase it and it diminishes.

What humans teach,

I also teach.

Those who force issues don't get their death.

I'm on the point of deeming this 'the father of teaching.'

From the Tao, one is created;

From one, two;

From two, three;

From three, ten thousand things.

All of them achieve harmony through the unification of affirmation and negation

Which is embraced by everything.

No one likes to be isolated (ku), without merit (kua), or worthless (pu ku),

Yet rulers refer to themselves with these names.

Thus, some things add to their value by reducing their value.

Some things reduce their value by adding to their value.

Other ancients have taught this; I teach it too.

"The man of violence will end his life in violence."

This is a basic motto.

The Tao bears the 'One'.

The 'One' bears the 'Two'.

The 'Two' bears the 'Three'.

The 'Three' bears the myriad creatures.

The myriad creatures carry yin and embrace yang, which both melt into 'chi' - the energy of life - to achieve harmony.

People detest above all orphanhood and widowhood, yet the rulers use these titles to describe themselves.

That is why in losing much is gained, and in gaining much is lost.

What others teach, I teach also:

He who is a ferocious adversary does nothing else but cause his own death.

With these words I will maintain my teaching.

The Tao generated one;

One generated two;

Two generated three;

Three generated the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things,

Carrying yin and embracing yang,

Used the empty vapor to achieve harmony.

What people loathe most are

Inadequacy, deficiency and unworthiness,

Yet, kings and dukes use them

To refer to themselves.

People sometimes gain through losing;

Sometimes lose through gaining.

Therefore, what kings teach,

I also choose to teach kings:

"A brute does not die a natural death."

I shall use it as the father of learning.

Your reputation or your person, which is closer to you?

Your person or your property, which is dearer to you?

Profit or loss, which is worse for you?

Over-eagerness leads to over-spending.

Too much property leads to too much loss.

Therefore, the person who is content with his lot will not know disgrace,

And the person who knows where to stop will never disappear,

He will exist forever.

The way begets one;

One begets two;

Two begets three;

Three begets the myriad creatures.

The
myriad creatures carry on their backs the yin and embrace in their arms the
yang and are the blending of the generative forces of the two.

There
are no words which men detest more than 'solitary', 'desolate', and 'hapless',
yet lords and princes use these to refer to themselves.

Thus
a thing is sometimes added to by being diminished and diminished by being added
to.

What
others teach I also teach.

'The violent shall not come to a natural end.'

I shall take this as my precept.

Reason's Modifications

Reason begets unity; unity begets duality; duality begets trinity; and trinity begets the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things are sustained by Yin [the negative principle]; they are encompassed by Yang [the positive principle], and the immaterial breath renders them harmonious.

That which the people find odious, to be orphaned, lonely, and unworthy, kings and princes select as their titles. Thus, on the one hand, loss implies gain, and on the other hand, gain implies loss.

What others have taught I teach also.

The strong and aggressive do not die a natural death; but I will obey the doctrine's father.

The Tao gave birth to the universe. The universe gave birth to the earth. The earth gave birth to man. Man gave birth to everything. Everything is experience, but receives a name. There is total harmony when name and experience combine. An ordinary man seeks a name in the eyes of others, but at their expense. The master experiences for himself. A violent man will not enjoy a natural death.

From Direction, One is born.

From One, Two is born.

From Two, Three is born.

From Three, myriad matters are born.

Myriad matters turn their backs on yin and embrace yang.

The complement of their energy produces harmony.

What people dislike are loneliness, isolation, and ungraciousness,

yet this is how Dukes and Princes self-address.

Thus, a matter expands through contraction;

contracts through expansion.

This is what others have taught me;

let me teach others the same: "A violent person does not die in place."

This is the theme of my teaching.

Way gave birth to one,

and one gave birth to two.

Two gave birth to three,

and three gave birth to the ten thousand things.

Then the ten thousand things shouldered yin and embraced yang,

blending ch'i to establish harmony.

People all hate scraping by orphaned, destitute, ill-fated, but true dukes and emperors call themselves just that.

Some things gain by loss, and some lose by gain.

I only teach

what the people teach:

Tyranny and force never come to a natural end.

I've taken the people as my schoolmaster.

Tao created the One;

The One produced the Two;

The two produced the Three;

And the Three produced all things.

All things carry the Yin (female) and embrace the Yang (male),

Harmony is achieved through interaction of these prime energies.

People hate to be orphans, widowers, or being destitute,

Yet kings and barons call themselves by these terms.

Thus:

One my gain by losing first, and

One my lose by gaining first.

What people teach I can also teach.

"A violent person would not die a natural death,"

Shall be my first lesson.

Tao
gives birth to one

One gives birth to two

Two gives birth to three

Three gives birth to the 10000 things.

All
things carry yin and embrace yang

With their blended animus, action in harmony happens.

In the time of men they dislike orphaned, widowed, unfavored

Yet kings and lords regard such as praiseworthy.

Men
have told others

I also am telling

Those who are striving and fierce die incomplete.

I use this as the father of my teaching.

When the Principle has emitted its virtue, the latter begins to evolve according to two alternating modalities. This evolution produces (or condenses) the median air (tenuous matter). From tenuous matter, under the influence of the two modalities yin and yang, all sentient beings are produced.

Coming out from the yin (from strength) they pass to the yang (to the act), through the influence of the two modalities on matter.

What men dislike is being alone, unique, incapable, (in obscurity and abasement), and yet emperors and princes are designated by these terms, (which imply humility without debasement).

Beings diminish themselves by wanting to augment themselves, and they are augmented through diminishing themselves.

Tao produces one

One produces two

Two produce three

Three produce myriad things

Myriad things, backed by yin and embracing yang

Achieve harmony by integrating their energy

What the people dislike

Are alone, bereft, and unworthy

But the rulers call themselves with these terms

So with all things

Appear to take loss but benefit

Or receive benefit but lose

What the ancients taught

I will also teach

The violent one cannot have a natural death

I will use this as the principal of teachings

What people dislike are abandonment, loneliness and being unworthy

And yet kings and lords name themeselves with such terms

Therefore

That which people hate to think of themselves as "orphan," "lowly," and "unworthy"

Yet the kings call themselves by these names

Some lose and yet gain,

Others gain and yet lose.

That which is taught by the people

I also teach:

"The forceful do not choose their place of death."

I regard this as the father of all teachings.

That which men hate is to be kithless, friendless and considered unworthy, but princes and dukes thus style themselves.

From this it would appear that advantages are disadvantageous, and disadvantages are advantageous.

I teach that which others have taught.

The violent and the fierce do not live out their years.

I shall be chief among the teachers.

THE TRANSFORMATION OF TAO

Tao produces unity; unity produces duality; duality produces trinity; trinity produces all things. All things bear the negative principle (yin) and embrace the positive principle (yang). Immaterial vitality, the third principle (chi), makes them harmonious.

Those things which are detested by the common people, namely to be called orphans, inferiors, and unworthies, are the very things kings and lords take for titles. There are some things which it is a gain to lose, and a loss to gain.

I am teaching the same things which are taught by others. But the strong and aggressive: ones do not obtain a natural death (i.e., self-confident teachers do not succeed). I alone expound the basis of the doctrine of the Tao.

Tao gives birth to one,

One gives birth to two,

Two gives birth to three,

Three gives birth to ten thousand beings.

Ten thousand beings carry yin on their backs and embrace yang in their front,

Blending these two vital breaths (ch'i) to attain harmony (ho).

What people hate most,

Are to be orphaned, widowed and unworthy.

Yet kings and dukes call themselves by these.

Thus things are either decreased so as to be increased,

Or increased (i) so as to be decreased (sun).

What others teach,

I also teach:

"The strong and violent (ch'iang liang) do not die a natural death."

This I shall hold as the father (fu) of my teaching.

Out of Tao comes Unity; out of Unity comes two; from two comes three; from three all things come.

The shade of Yin is on the back of erverything; the light of Yang is on the face of everything. From their blending together balance exists in the world.

To feel unworthy, to be alone, orphaned, is greatly feared and disliked, yet statesmen claim these feelings. Loss sometimes benefits; benefits can be a loss.

Others have taught this too: the violent meet violent ends. This is a good teaching.

Out of Tao, One.

Out of One, Two.

Out of Two, Three.

Out of Three, all things.

All things carry Yin and face Yang.

Out of the union of Yin and Yang, harmony.

No one wants to be "orphaned," " widowed," or "unworthy."

But kings and princes use these words as titles for themselves.

You win by losing. You lose by winning.

It has been said, and I agree, "A violent man dies violently."

Forty-two

The Tao begot one.

One begot two.

Two begot three.

And three begot the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry yin and embrace yang.

They achieve harmony by combining these forces.

Men
hate to be "orphaned," "widowed," or "worthless,"

But this is how kings and lords describe themselves.

For
one gains by losing

And loses by gaining.

What
others teach, I also teach; that is:

"A violent man will die a violent death!"

This will be the essence of my teaching.

The Tao begets the One;

The One consists of Two in opposition (the Yin and Yang);

The Two begets the Three;

The Three begets all things of the world.

All things connote the Yin and Yang.

The Yin and Yang keep acting upon each other

And thus things keep changing and unifying themselves.

Words like "the solitary", "the few" and "the unkind"

Are usually detested by people,

Yet lords and kings use them to call themselves.

That is why

A thing is sometimes added to when being reduced,

Or is reduced when being added to.

So I teach what I am taught:

"The violent will not come to a good end."

This I will take as the first lesson when I teach.

Tao gives birth to One;

One gives birth to Two;

Two give birth to Three,

Three give birth to the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry the yin on their backs and hold the yang in their arms;

And attain harmony through the blending of the two energies.

What people detest most

Is to be orphaned, widowed and ill-provided.

But that is how kings and princes call themselves.

Therefore, of things, some gain by losing,

Some lose by gaining.

What others teach

I also teach.

"The violent one will not attain his death."

I will take this to be my teacher.

Dao engenders one. (Tai-chi)

One engenders two. (Yin and Yang)

Two engenders three. (combinations of Yin and Yang)

Three engenders everything.

Everything carries Yin and embraces Yang.

The mixing of Yin and Yang becomes an entity.

People dislike words like orphaned, widowed and unworthy.

Nevertheless, the lords use these terms as their titles.

An affair may finally turn out well despite a very bad start.

Conversely, it could turn out badly with a good start.

That is what I have learnt: nothing is certain in life.

I will use this to teach others.

However, I will still use

"Those who resort to violence will die by violence" as my principal teaching.

Tao and Transformation

Tao Hua

Tao gave birth to One;

One gave birth to Two;

Two gave birth to Three;

Three gave birth to the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry Yin and embrace Yang.

The two primordial breaths blend and produce harmony.

To be orphaned or lonely or unworthy

Is what all people detest;

Yet kings and nobles apply those terms to themselves.

Indeed, things sometimes benefit by an intended injury,

And sometimes receive injury from an intended benefit.

What others teach, I shall also teach:

"The strong and violent will die an unnatural death."

This will serve as my chief lesson.

From the Tao was born the One;

From the One was born the Two;

From the Two was born the Three;

And from the Three all things proceeded.

All creatures have the shadow at their backs and embrace the light;

And the everlasting breath of life unites them.

What men hate is to be orphaned, lonely, unworthy;

But do not kings and princes often so describe themselves?

"For things by being diminished may be increased,

And by being increased, diminished."

What others teach, I will teach too.

"Those who are foolhardy and violent do not come to a natural end."

On this maxim I too will base my teaching.

Tao bore one, one bore two, two bore three;

Three bore the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry yin and embrace yang,

Whose blending breaths makes them harmonize.

Men hate to be

Orphaned, lowly, unworthy,

Yet barons and kings

Use these names as titles.

Indeed,

You may gain by losing,

And you may lose by gaining.

What others have taught, I also teach:

Men of violence come to death by violence.

Whoever said this is my teacher.

The universal subtle essence gave birth to One.

One gave birth to Two.

Two gave birth to Three.

Three gave birth to the Myriad Things.

All lives have their backs to the yin and embrace the yang.

There is nothing more loathed by people than to be orphaned, desolate, and hapless.

Yet the wise ancient kings, princes, and barons used such titles to refer to themselves.

A thing is sometimes benefitted by being humbled,

and diminished by being expanded.

What the ancients have taught, I also shall teach:

"A man of force and violence will come to a violent end."

Whoever said this can be my teacher and father.

XLII.

Transformations
of the Tao

The
Tao produced One; One produced Two;

Two
produced Three; Three produced All.

All the
myriad things bear the yin with darkened pall,

They
embrace the yang which lights the coming view,

And
between the yin that was, and the yang that is to be,

The
immaterial breath makes harmony.

Things
that men dislike are to be orphans, lonely men,

Unworthy,
incomplete, and yet these very things

Are
taken for their titles by princes and by kings;

So it
is sometimes that losing gains again,

And
sometimes that gaining loses in its turn.

I am
teaching what, by others taught, I learn;

The
violent and aggressive a good death do not die,

And
the father of this teaching it is I.

In Tao is Unity of Life,

In Unity is Duality of Life,

In Duality is Trinity of Life,

In Trinity all beings have life.

All beings shun the principle of Inertia,

They hold to the principle of Life.

They are brought into deep harmony by the Breath of the Deep.

That which men dislike is to be called orphans, solitary, wheels without naves;

Yet princes and rulers may thus be named.

Therefore some are increased by being diminished,

And some are diminished by being increased.

That which men have taught I also shall teach:

"He who is strong and violent shall not meet with easy death."

I shall in this way teach fundamentals.

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

gave birth to One,

( The Unified Field )

One gave birth to Two,

( Energy and Matter, E=MC2 )

Two gave birth to Three,

( Gravity, Nuclear and Electro-Magnetic Forces)

Three gave birth to all things.

All the things carry the

Yin (physical(matter)) on their backs and

hold the

Yang (spiritual(energy)) to their chest,

Getting their vital balance from the

proper blending of the two vital Breaths.

(Physical(matter) and Spiritual(energy))

What is more hated by men than to be "helpless( in need of help),"

"little( no desire to be superior )," and

"worthless ( no desire to be rich )"?

These are the very names the

true leaders call themselves.

You can gain by losing (putting ourselves in a position to gain),

And you can lose by gaining (receiving our hearts desire and feeling lost

).

What others have taught I repeat:

"A person who lives for destruction will attract destruction to themself."

(Destruction attracts destruction.

Construction attracts construction.

Weakness attracts destruction.

Virtue (power) attracts construction.)

I will make this chapter my most important teaching.

One produced two; two produced three; three produced the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things turn away from the dark (Yin) and embrace the light (Yang); the vapours of the void blend them harmoniously.

What people loathe is to be "orphaned", "lonely", "destitute", and yet kings and dukes call themselves thus.

For things are sometimes increased by decrease, and decreased by increase.

What others have taught I also teach; that men of violence will not reach their natural death, I shall be the father of that doctrine.

The Tao produced One; One produced Two; Two produced Three;

Three produced All things. All things leave behind them the Obscurity

(out of which they have come), and go forward to embrace the

Brightness (into which they have emerged), while they are harmonised

by the Breath of Vacancy.

What
men dislike is to be orphans, to have little virtue, to be as

carriages without naves; and yet these are the designations which

kings and princes use for themselves. So it is that some things are

increased by being diminished, and others are diminished by being

increased.

What
other men (thus) teach, I also teach. The violent and strong

do not die their natural death. I will make this the basis of my

teaching.

THOU gave birth to Unity;
Unity gave birth to Duality;
Duality
gave birth to Trinity;
Trinity gave birth to the myriad creatures.

The
myriad creatures bear IN on their backs,
and embrace ANKH to their bosoms;

they unify these subtleties, and thus achieve harmony.
That
which everyone in the world hates most
is to be orphaned, destitute and hapless..

yet Hierarchs call themselves thus!
Things
may be diminished by being increased,
or increased by being diminished.
Therefore,
that which people teach,
after some reflection, I also teach people.
They
say, "A tyrant does not die a natural death."
I take that as my Guide.

Awareness
comes from nothingness

So all can see it's plainly one

Contains all opposition

Ten thousand things are now begun

All
these things embrace the void

And face the manifest

Achieving thus true harmony

They find existence truly blessed

No
one wants to be considered

Empty and alone

Yet that's exactly what the seers

Say they have been shown

And
violence is not the way

I give you this instruction

Those who live by violence

Will bring about their own destruction

TAO gave birth to One,

One gave birth to Two,

Two gave birth to Three,

Three gave birth to all the myriad things.

All the myriad things carry the Yin on their backs and hold the Yang in their embrace,

Deriving their vital harmony from the proper blending of the two vital Breaths.

What is more loathed by men than to be "helpless," "little," and "worthless"?

And yet these are the very names the princes and barons call themselves.

Truly, one may gain by losing;

And one may lose by gaining.

What another has taught let me repeat:

"A man of violence will come to a violent end."

Whoever said this can be my teacher and my father.

The Way creates one,

One gives birth to two,

Two gives rise to three,

And three produce all things.

All things are composed of yin and yang,

The proper blending of these attributes will ensure harmony.

The common man hates to be small, powerless and unworthy;

but this is how the masters describe themselves.

Thus it is that in gaining is oftentimes much lost,

And in the most profound loss can be found the most gain.

What others have taught I teach also, 'a violent man will lead himself to a violent death',

This is the essence and cornerstone of my teachings.

The Tao gave birth to One.

The One gave birth to Two.

The Two gave birth to Three.

The Three gave birth to all of creation.

All
things carry Yin

yet embrace Yang.

They blend their life breaths

in order to produce harmony.

People
despise being orphaned, widowed and poor.

But the noble ones take these as their titles.

In losing, much is gained,

and in gaining, much is lost.

What
others teach I too will teach:

"The strong and violent will not die a natural death."

The principle is not a thing. Call it zero.

The principle in action is the unity of creation. This unity is a single whole. Call it one.

Creation consists of pairs of opposites or polarities. Call these polarities two.

These polarities become creative when they interact. Their interaction is the third element. Call it three.

For example, a man and a woman are two. Their interaction, or intercourse, the third element makes babies. That is creative. That is how all creativity occurs.

The wise leader knows about pairs of opposites and their interactions. The leader knows how to be creative.

In order to lead, the leader learns to follow. In order to prosper, the leader learns to live simply. In both cases, it is the interaction that is creative.

Leading without following is sterile. Trying to become rich by accumulating more and more is a full-time career and not free at all.

Being one-sided always produces unexpected and paradoxical results. Being well-defended will not protect you; it will diminish your life and eventually kill you.

Exceptions to these examples of traditional wisdom are very hard to find.

The Tao gives birth to one.

One gives birth to two.

Two gives birth to three,

And three gives birth to All things.

All things carry Yin and embrace Yang

Desiring nothing and finding harmony.

All people hate loneliness and poverty

Though they are the noblest of states.

So in losing, much is gained,

And in gaining, much is lost.

What others have taught, I also teach:

"The violent shal die with violence."

This is my primary teaching.

Infinity
is oneness.

Infinity is the potential of all things.

All things are one with Infinity.

Distinguishing
creates the two.

All things can be distinguished as yin and yang.

The harmony of oneness is achieved by not

distinguishing.

Human
beings hate being alone, ridiculed, and

misunderstood.

Yet this is how leaders and kings perceive

themselves

when they forget their oneness with Infinity.

One
achieves peace by ignoring distinctions

and becomes confused by endless judgments

and distinctions.

Others
teach;

"A violent man will reap a violent death."

I teach;

"All men will die."

This
is the simplicity of Infinity.

The Way creates one.

One creates two.

Two creates three.

Three creates all things.

All things carry Yin and embrace Yang; both forces blend.

Men dislike being Orphaned, Widowed and Unlucky, as the Kingship declares

itself.

Thus one may gain by losing, or lose by gaining.

What others teach, I also teach.

The strong need not die.

I teach survival.

Tao gives birth to one;

One gives birth to two;

Two gives birth to three;1

And three gives birth to the Ten Thousand Things.

The Ten Thousand Things carry yin and embrace yang;

And by blending these vital forces, they achieve harmony.

The people hate being orphaned, lonely, and without sustenance,

Even though this is how kings and lords describe themselves.

One may gain by losing

And lose by gaining.

I teach what others have taught:

'Those who are violent do not die a natural death.'

I shall make this the basis of my teaching.

1. Perhaps 'two' is 'non-being', and 'three', 'being', or 'two', 'yin', and 'three', 'yang'. But see also Wilhelm (1985, 21 and 73) who suggests that 'one' is the unity in which all opposites are 'intermingled', and which generates 'two' 'as antithesis (the opposites of light and dark, male and female ... ). From these pairs of opposites the phenomenal world is born as the Three'. (p. 21) However we understand the numbers, this part of the chapter points to the multiplicity of things having their source in the undifferentiated Tao.

The Way produces one.

One produces two.

Two produces three.

Three produces everything.

Everything has polar elements in it

That interact to achieve harmony.

People all hate being isolated, helpless and wicked,

But kings use these words as their titles.

Therefore, things can gain from losses

And can lose because of gainings.

I just teach what I have been taught.

Those who willfully go against the Way

Will die an undue death,

And are fit to be my textbook.

Tao produced The One The One produced Two Two produced Three Three produced the thousands of things.

The thousands of things: Turn their backs on the quiet and dark and embrace the aggressive and bright. An Empty ch'i brings Harmony.

What people look down upon: to be orphaned, poor, destitute. But the kings and princes make these names into titles.

Yes, things: Sometimes you reduce them, and they are enlarged sometimes you enlarge them, and they are reduced.

What another has taught, I also teach: "A violent man will not reach his natural end." I will make of this the father of my teaching.

Once One came out from Tao. He took with Himself other Two. Those Two took other Three. And all They began to create various forms of life on the planet.*

All creatures are subdivided into pairs of the opposite yin and yang and are filled with the chi energy. All further development comes from their interaction.

All beings are afraid of loneliness and perceive it as suffering. This concerns, in particular, the earthly rulers.

All such people care only about themselves and refuse helping others.

Yet the correct decision consists in dedicating oneself to caring about others and forgetting about oneself.

The wise spiritual seeker, who dedicated his life to the goodness of everyone, will not be conquered by death. I prefer these words to all other precepts of all sages.

Those Who attained Tao merge in It into One.

* The author says here about several Holy Spirits (Te) that guided the evolution of souls on our planet (see more details about this in the book God Speaks. Divine Teachers — about Themselves).

In the beginning was only the Tao Way,

Its first manifestation was the cause of another manifestation.

That one has produced yet another manifestation.

Thus all things have appeared.

The pair of Yin and Yang has manifested,

The Ch'i energy started to move everything,

Harmony was thus established.

The
ordinary people depend on each other,

Only the Wise Person is contempt with himself,

Living by himself, he goes with the harmonious flow of the Tao Way.

The
Dao produced the One. The One produced the Two. The Two produced the Three.
And the Three produced the myriad creatures. The myriad creatures bear Yin on
their backs and embrace Yang. They blend lifebreaths in order to create a harmony.
People abominate nothing more than to be orphaned, bereaved, and unworthy, yet
the lords and kings take these [terms] as their appellations. So creatures may
be worn away and thereby augmented, or they may be augmented and thereby worn
away.

What
other people teach I also teach: "Ruffians will come to no good end.'' I take
this as my precept.

Tao begets One.

One begets Two.

Two begets Three.

Three begets all things.

All things carry the female and embrace the male.

And by breathing together, they live in harmony.

What the people hate is being orphaned, widowed, and starved.

But kings and dukes call themselves these names.

Therefore everything can be augmented when diminished, and diminished when augmented.

What the people teach, I teach too.

The violent and fierce cannot die a natural death.

I will become the father of teaching.

Knowing Polarity

The Tao produced the One.

The One produced the Two.

The Two produced the Three.

The Three produced All Things.

All Things carry Yin and hold to Yang;

Their blended Influence brings Harmony.

People hate to be alone, lonely, and unfavored;

And yet leaders take these names.

Thus in Natural Law

Some lose and in this way profit.

Some profit and in this way lose.

What others have taught, I also teach:

Those who are violent do not die naturally.

I will make this my chief teaching.

Nothing begot One. The One begot Two and the Two begot Three. The Three gives birth to the ten thousand things. Within the ten thousand things are yin and yang. One will lose by gaining, and will gain by losing. You are always one with the Dao.

The Way begot one,

And the one, two;

Then the two begot three

And three, all else.

All
things bear the shade on their backs

And the sun in their arms;

By the blending of breath

From the sun and the shade,

Equilibrium comes to the world.

Orphaned,
or needy, or desolate, these

Are conditions much feared and disliked;

Yet in public address, the king

And the nobles account themselves thus.

So a loss sometimes benefits one

Or a benefit proves to be loss.

What
others have taught

I also shall teach:

If a violent man does not come

To a violent death,

I shall choose him to teach me.

Tao gives birth to the unified thing (One),

The One splits itself into two opposite aspects (Two),

The Two gives birth to another (Three),

The newborn Third produces a myriad of things.

The myriad of things contain the Yin and Yang within themselves as opposite forces,

Both of them (Yin and Yang) are unified with harmony in the invisible breath.

People disdain the "orphaned," "solitary" or "unworthy,"

And yet they are the very names by which kings and dukes call themselves.

Therefore all things may increase when purposely diminished,

And they may diminish when increased.

What people teach each other, I also teach:

"The violent and strong does not die his natural death,"

I will make that fact the beginning of my teaching.

The Dao begets the One;

the One begets two;

two beget three;

and three beget the myriad things.

The myriad things, bearing yin and embracing yang, form a unified harmony through the fusing of these vital forces.

What people most hate are "the orphan," "the widower," and "the unworthy," yet lords and princes use these terms to refer to themselves.

Thus it is that some are augmented by being diminished, and others are diminished by being augmented.

What others teach, I also teach.

The dangerously bold do not get to die a natural death, so I am going to use them as the fathers of my teaching.

1. The Way gave birth to the One.

2. The One gave birth to the Two.

3. The Two gave birth to the Three.

4. And the Three gave birth to the ten thousand things.

5. The ten thousand things carry Yin on their backs and wrap their arms around
Yang.

6. Through the blending of the qi they arrive at a state of harmony.

7.
The things that are hated by the whole world

8. Are to be orphaned, widowed, and have no grain.

9. Yet kings and dukes take these as their names.

10. Thus with all things—some are increased by taking away;

11. While some are diminished by adding on.

12.
Therefore, what other men teach,

13. [I] will also consider and then teach to others.

14. Thus, "The strong and violent do not come to a natural end."

15. I will take this as the father of my studies.

Chapter 42 starts
out

with some cosmic mumbo-jumbo

about Tao making one,

one making two,

two making three,

and three making everything else.

I don't know
what it means,

and, frankly,

I wouldn't worry about it too much.

Let's get to
the practical part:

Men hate to be called

powerless, insignificant, or unworthy,

but that's how

Masters describe themselves.

Because when
we lose, we've won.

And when we succeed, we've failed.

Other people
will tell you

what I'm telling you now:

"Live by the sword, die by the sword."

That's pretty much what Chapter 42

boils down to.

(See Chapter 46 for more details.)

.

All Things

The Way produced the One;

the One produced two;

two produced three;

and three produced all things.

All things have the receptivity of the female

and the activity of the male.

Through union with the life force they blend in harmony.

People hate being orphaned, lonely, and unworthy.

Yet kings and nobles call themselves such.

Often gain can be a loss, and loss can be a gain.

What others teach, I teach also:

"The violent die a violent death."

I shall make this primary in my teaching.

Out of Tao came the One.

The One begot the Two.

Two produced Three.

Out of Three the multiplicity of beings flowed which are appearance outside being inside both united by Spirit.

The masses are afraid of being inside, alone and little.

The few the leaders give preference to it knowing that being-more is less and being-less is more.

Violent Man's Fate

Lao Tze says,

From Tao arises one;

from one arises two;

from two arises three, and from three arise all things.

All things leave behind them the obscurity (Ying), and go forward to embrace the brightness (Yang) and inherit the blending property of the two harmonized polarities.

What men dislike is to be called solitary, unworthy, virtueless;

and yet those kings and princes regard them matching to their status.

So those things are benefitted by being harmed, others are harmed by being benefitted.

While other men have taught their precept, I have my own,

- the violent man shall die a violent death.

I will make this the basis of my teaching.

THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE TAO

The
Tao existed before its name,

and from its name, the opposites evolved,

giving rise to three divisions,

and then to names abundant.

These
things embrace receptively,

achieving inner harmony,

and by their unity create

the inner world of man.

No
man wishes to be seen

as worthless in another's eyes,

but the wise leader describes himself this way,

for he knows that one may gain by losing,

and lose by gaining,

and that a violent man

will not die a natural death.

The Tao gives birth to One.

One gives birth to Two.

Two gives birth to Three.

Three gives birth to all things.

All things have their backs to the female

and stand facing the male.

When male and female combine,

all things achieve harmony.

Ordinary men hate solitude.

But the Master makes use of it,

embracing his aloneness, realizing

he is one with the whole universe.

Dao gave birth to One - Existence: Heaven;

One gave birth to Two - Coexistence: Heaven and Earth;

Two gave birth to Three: Heaven, Earth and Life;

and Three gave birth to All Things.

All Things are sustained by Yin - the inactive cosmic gas, and are embraced by Yang - the active cosmic gas.

To produce these gases into orderly use is to harmonize them.

What the people hate are: "orphanhood", "widowhood" and "indigence".

Yet these terms are used as designations by rulers.

Materialistically, one may gain by losing,

Similarly, one may lose by gaining.

What people preach I also preach.

Then I shall be the master of preaching.

A violent person cannot die a natural death.

Tao gives rise to one.

One gives rise to two.

Two gives rise to three.

Three gives rise to all things.

All things carry yin and embrace yang,

Drawing Chi together into harmony.

What the world hates is the widow and orphan without support.

But lords and rulers name themselves these.

Do not seek gain from losing, nor loss from gaining.

What people teach, after discussion becomes doctrine.

Those who excel in strength do not prevail over death.

I would use this as the father of teaching.

XLII

The
tao gave birth to the universe

The universe opened heaven and earth

Heaven and earth added man to their number

And man named the ten thousand things

All
living things wrap themselves in the female and wrap the male

And by so cycling achieve harmony and life

So all despise the same things, where the cycle fails

Being orphaned, abandoned, or starving

All leaders, then, claim as their sacred trust

To defend those with no other options

And so it goes - where there is great loss, there is great attention

Where there are great gains, all is secrecy and shadowed warfare.

Consider
well, then, the following phrase:

'Who uses force will be forced in turn'

You have to start somewhere

The Way Produces One

The Way produces one;

one produces two,

two produce three,

three produce all beings:

all beings bear yin and embrace yang,

with a mellowing energy for harmony.

The things people dislike

are only to be alone, lacking, and unworthy;

yet these are what monarchs call themselves.

Therefore people may gain from loss,

and may lose from gain.

What others teach,

I also teach.

The strong cannot master their death:

I take this to be the father of teachings.

Tao produce unity.

Unity splits into two.

Two gives birth to three.

Three produces everything.

Everything carries Yin and embraces Yang.

Yin and Yang work together makes harmony.

Loneliness, friendlessness, and worthlessness are generally disliked.

Yet, kings and lords use these terms to describe themselves.

Things can benefit from damages.

Things can also be damaged from benefits.

Therefore, I can teach what the other taught me:

Those who act against the law of the Nature will never get what they want.

This is a basic principle for me to teach.

The Way gives birth to one.

One gives birth to two.

Two gives birth to three.

Three gives birth to ten thousand things.

All things carry the yin on their backs and embrace the yang in their arms.

They are harmony with each other because of these two null ethers.

What is more loathed by men than to be "solitary," "little," and "worthless"?

Yet these are the very names the kings and lords call themselves.

Therefore, one may gain by losing; and one may lose by gaining.

What ancients taught I repeat: "A man of violence will die an unnatural death."

Whoever said this is my teacher.

The Tao begot one.

One begot two.

Two begot three.

Three begot everything.

Everything carries Yin (on the back) and embraces Yang (in the front).

They achieve harmony by combining these forces.

Men hate to be "the Only," "the only One," or "worthless,"

but this is how kings and lords describe themselves.

For one gains by losing,

loses by gaining.

What others teach, I also teach, that is:

"A violent man will die a violent death!"

This will be the essence of my teaching.

The Tao gives birth to the One.

The One gives birth to two.

Two gives birth to three.

And three gives birth to the ten thousand things.

The
ten thousand things have their backs in the shadow

while they embrace the light.

Harmony is achieved by blending

the breaths of these two forces.

People
dislike the words "alone," "helpless," "worthless,"

yet this is how Princes describe them selves.

So
it is that sometimes a thing is increased

by being diminished and

diminished by being increased.

What
others teach I also teach:

"A violent person will not die a natural death."

I shall make this the basis of my teaching.

The
way

is one

but soon one is made into two

and two becomes three and four ...

and everything else

all of which contain the elements of yin and yang

dark and light, water and fire, hard and soft, male and female

in whose blend and harmony all existence depends.

No one likes

to come from the lower class

to be poor, hungry, needy

yet politicians and priests gain by calling themselves such.

Still, a person

gains by losing

and loses by gaining,

becomes wise from disadvantage

and ignorant from privilege.

The
truths of other religions and philosophies

are the same:

an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,

turn the other cheek,

a violent person will die a violent death.

Dao gave birth to the one; the one gave birth successively to two things, three
things, up the everything, everybody and the whole world we know.

The ten thousand things carry the yin as some back or behind, and hug the yang
in front. Through the blending of the pervading principles as some abstract
union, and by a further blending [designing] the material force (ki) they can
gain [sound] harmony. And so the union in harmony gets strong [and defences].

In other words, living beings can't turn their backs to the shade [such as cooling
yin] without having the sun on their bellies [it could be invigorating yang],
and it's on such (yin-yang) blending of so-called breaths that [most] harmony
depends.

Most people hate to be diagnosed as lonely, unworthy, orphaned, needy, ill-provided.
Yet princes and dukes style themselves so, and call themselves by these names.

Truly,
things are often increased by seeking to diminish them and diminished by seeking
to increase them." And sometimes things are benefited by being taken away from
and suffer by being added to. And so it often happens that things can gain by
losing and lose by gaining.

What
others have taught, I teach also:

"Violent and fierce people hardly die a natural [elegant] death."

Yet, show me a man of violence that came to a good end, and I will take him
for my teacher. I shall make all this the father (basis) of my teaching. [Uha.]

The Way gave birth to unity,

Unity gave birth to duality,

Duality gave birth to trinity,

Trinity gave birth to the myriad creatures.

The myriad creatures bear yin on their backs and embrace yang in their bosoms.

They neutralize these vapors

and thereby achieve harmony.

That which all under heaven hate most

Is to be orphaned, destitute, and hapless.

Yet kings and dukes call themselves thus.

Things may be diminished by being increased, increased by being diminished.

Therefore,

That which people teach,

After deliberation, I also teach people.

Therefore,

"The tyrant does not die a natural death."

I take this as my mentor.

Tao emaned the One; the one emaned the Two; and the two emaned the Three.

From the Three all things have proceeded.

All things are backed by the Unmanifest and faced by the Manifest.

That which unites them is the immaterial breath.

Orphanage, isolation, and a chariot without wheels are shunned by the people; but kings and great men appropriate these names to themselves.

For things increase by being deprived; and being added to they are diminished.

That which people teach by their actions I make use of to instruct them.

Those who are violent and headstrong, for example, do not die a natural death.

They teach a good lesson, and so I make use of them.

Two Energies of Love

Two energies always play

whenever you make love.

The active Yang dances

with the receptive Yin.

One of you leads the way,

beckoning the other to follow.

One gives pleasure,

the other receives.

Then Yin and Yang change places.

Giving and receiving flow together,

over, under, around, and through.

Yin and Yang together

make the ecstasy of love.

Sexual pleasure has many moods and forms,

but it is always a dance.

Who plays the role of leader

and who of follower,

changes from encounter to encounter

and moment to moment.

But remember it is a dance,

not a contest or a performance.

Tao produced the One. The One produced the two. The two produced the three. And the three produced the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry the yin and embrace the yang, and
through the blending of the material force they achieve harmony.

People hate to be children without parents, lonely people without
spouses, or men without food to eat, And yet kings and lords call
themselves by these names.

Therefore it is often the case that things gain by losing and lose by gaining.

What others have taught, I teach also: "Violent and fierce people do
not die a natural death." I shall make this the father of my teaching.

Life, when it
came to be,

Bore one, then two, then three

Elements of things;

And thus the three began

-Heaven and earth and man-

To balance happenings:

Cool night behind, warm day ahead,

For the living, for the dead.

Though a commoner be loth to say

That he is only common clay,

Kings and princes often state

How humbly they are leading,

Because in true succeeding

High and low correlate.

It is an ancient thought,

Which many men have taught,

That he who over-reaches

And tries to live by force

Shall die thereby of course,

And is what my own heart teaches.

The DAO produces ONE;

ONE produces the YIN and YANG (TWO),

the YIN and YANG produce harmonic spirit (THREE),

harmonic spirit produces everything.

Everything is based on the YIN-YANG and is filled with harmonic spirit.

The things people dislike the most are the singles, the widowers, and the unkind.

However, the kings call themselves these bad names.

So, things sometimes get hurt but benefit, sometimes benefit but get hurt.

What others taught me I will now teach you: The bullies will die unnaturally.

I treat this as the base of my teaching.

The Tao, the wholeness, gives rise to oneness.

Oneness gives rise to complementary unity.

Complementary unity gives rise to complementary trinity.

Complementary trinity gives rise to everything in existence.

Everything consists of the complementarity of yang in the center and yin surrounding it.

From the balanced interchange between the two arises equilibrium in disequilibrium.

Ordinary people hate nothing more than to be powerless, unworthy, or destitute.

Yet this is what people in high position call themselves.

This means, in accordance with the principle of complementarity,

That to lose is to gain and to gain is to lose.

Let me repeat what others have taught:

The strong and violent, being out of balance, do not die natural deaths.

This is the very foundation of my teaching.

The Way produces one.

One produces two.

Two produces three.

Three produces everything.

Everything has polar elements in it

That interact to achieve harmony.

People all hate being isolated, helpless and wicked,

But kings use these words as their titles.

Therefore, things can gain from losses

And can lose because of gainings.

I just teach what I have been taught.

Those who willfully go against the Way

Will die an undue death,

And are fit to be my textbook.

The Way creates one,

One gives birth to two,

Two gives rise to three,

And three produce all things.

All things are composed of yin and yang,

The proper blending of these attributes will ensure harmony.

The common man hates to be small, powerless and unworthy;

but this is how the masters describe themselves.

Thus it is that in gaining is oftentimes much lost,

And in the most profound loss can be found the most gain.

What others have taught I teach also, 'a violent man will lead himself to a violent death',

This is the essence and cornerstone of my teachings.

