===== Chapter 46 =====

[When] the world has the Tao

[It] retires trotting horses to fertilize the soil.

[When] the world lacks the Tao

War horses are bred in the suburbs.

Of misfortunes, there is none greater than not knowing sufficiency.

Of faults, there is none greater than desiring gain.

This is the reason that to know the sufficiency of sufficiency

Is a lasting sufficiency indeed.

With Tao under heaven Stray horses fertilize the fields. Without Tao under heaven Warhorses are bred at the frontier.

There is no greater calamity Than not knowing what is enough. There is no greater fault Than desire for success.

Therefore, Knowing that enough is enough Is always Enough.

When the world follows Tao

Carriage horses work on the farm fields.

When the world lacks Tao

War horses are bred outside city walls.

There is no greater fault Than having many desires,

No greater defect Than not knowing when one has enough.

No greater tragedy Than the desire to obtain.

Thus knowing when one has enough

Is to always have enough.

CONTENTMENT

Of old -

When the land was in harmony with the Tao,

Horses were seen fertilizing and cultivating the land.

When the land was out of harmony with the Tao,

Horses were seen only on the battlefield.

Alas:

The paramount temptation is desire for the possessions of others.

The paramount predicament is self-destructive harboring of discontent.

The paramount misfortune is greed for acquisition.

Therefore:

Mastering contentment within one's own nature,

Is to be truly content far all time.

When Heaven below (sacred body) is with the Tao, galloping horses* are curbed and used to haul dung.

When Heaven below does not have the Tao, war horses breed on sacred ground.

There is no greater misfortune than not knowing contentment.

There is no greater downfall than having deep-seated desires.

Know contentment. Your contentment is always enough!

* The galloping horse is the symbol of sanctity, power and outstanding achievement of a nation.

THE WITHDRAWAL FROM AMBITION

When the Tao beareth away on Earth, men put swift horses to night-carts.

When it is neglected, they breed chargers in the border marches.

There
is no evil worse than ambition; no misery worse than discontent; no

crime greater than greed. Content of mind is peace and satisfaction

eternal.

When the Tao prevails in the world, they send back their swift horsesto (draw) the dung-carts. When the Tao is disregarded in the world, thewarhorses breed in the border lands. There is no guilt greater than tosanction ambition; no calamity greater than to be discontented with one'slot; no fault greater than the wish to be getting. Therefore the sufficiencyof contentment is an enduring and unchanging sufficiency.

If men lived by their nature

Horses would gallop in the open air

But since men got civilized

Battle horses standing at the frontier

There is no bigger curse than dissatisfaction

Nothing more disastrous than being discontent with life

Nothing more fatal than being eager for possessions

One who knows the peace of satisfaction, is always satisfied

When what is natural prevails in human affairs, horses forced to train for racing are returned to the fertile pastures. When artificiality prevails in human affairs, horses are trained for war and are restricted to walled enclosures.

There is no greater evil than desiring to change others - (to take from or give to others what they do not, of their own accord, want to give or take). There is no greater misfortune than desiring to change oneself - being discontented with one's lot. There is no greater vice than desiring to change things - (to possess, control, or reconstruct their natures).

Only he who is satisfied with whatever satisfactions his own nature provides for him is truly satisfied.

When there is Tao in the empire

The galloping steeds are turned back to fertilize the ground by their droppings.

When there is not Tao in the empire

War horses will be reared even on the sacred mounds below the city walls.

(No lure is greater than to possess what others want,)

No disaster greater than not to be content with what one has,

No presage of evil greater than men should be wanting to get more.

Truly:

"He who has once known the contentment that comes simply through being content,

Will never again be otherwise than contented".

When Tao is embraced in the realm,

race horses haul their own manure.

When Tao is unknown in the realm,

war horses are bred at the borders.

There is no greater curse than desire,

no greater misfortune than greed.

He who knows enough is enough

will always have enough.

When the world holds to the way

Retired racehorses are useful for manure

When the world loses the way

War horses breed throughout the frontier

There is no vice greater than submitting to greed

No suffering greater than never knowing sufficiency

No error greater than the hunger for gain

So to know that sufficiency is in itself sufficient

Is a truly durable sufficiency

Desire

When the world has the Way,

Ambling horses are retired to fertilize fields.

When the world lacks the Way

War horses are bred outside the city.

Of sins - none is greater

than having things that one desire,

Of disasters - none is greater

than not knowing when one has enough.

Of defects - none brings greater sorrow

than desire to attain.

Therefore he who knows that enough

is enough is abiding contentment indeed.

When the world practices Tao, horses fertilize the fields. When the world ignores Tao, horses are bred for war.

There is no greater calamity than desire, no greater curse than greed.

Know that enough is enough, and you'll always have enough.

When the Tao suffuses man and Nature,

Swift horses nourish the fields with their dung.

When people abandon the Tao,

The horses are bred for battle,

And Nature is defiled.

The greatest disaster is to lack contentment.

The greatest curse is wanting more than you need.

Therefore the student of the Sage

Feels exactly when he has enough,

And thus receives eternal contentment.

Here, Lao Tzu dramatically underlines the themes he presented in Chapters 43 and 44, by referring back to the same metaphorical images of the horse and the dangers of excess. When horses are free to run (remember the discussion of wu-wei in Chapter 43), they spread nourishment back to the earth as fertilizer. But when they are bred and trained for war, then their nourishing dung is wasted on the killing fields, which are poisoned with the blood of human slaughter.

Unforced action returns nourishment to Nature, while force and power only defile it. War is always a product of the human obsession with excess; thus "the greatest curse is wanting more than you need." Not only does excess bring conflict, it makes us unable to even enjoy what we have! But to enter into a learning partnership with the Sage is to always feel when you have enough, which is the lesson of the previous two chapters. This, indeed, is the greatest blessing of all.

Contentment

When
the world follows Tao,

racehorses work on farms.

When the world forsakes Tao,

cavalry horses practice in parks.

The
greatest curse is discontent.

It is the greatest misery.

The greatest sin is selfish striving.

Being
content with contentment

is to be always satisfied.

When the empire is controlled by the Tao, riding horses are employed in agriculture; when the empire is without Tao, war horses are in every open space.

There is no sin greater than covetousness; no calamity greater than discontent; no fault greater than acquisitiveness.

Who therefore knows the contentment of content possesses unchanging content.

Swift horses are curbed for hauling dung-carts (in the field).

When Tao does not reign in the world,

War horses are bred on the commons (outside the cities)

There is no greater crime than seeking what men desire;

There is no greater misery than knowing no content;

There is no greater calamity than indulging in greed.

Therefore the contentment of knowing content will ever be contented.

Guiding Contentment

When the social world has a guide

We turn back fast horses in order to fertilize.

When the social world lacks a guide

War horses are produced in the suburbs.

Among bad omens, none is greater than not knowing to 'sufficient.'

Among evils, none is greater than desiring 'getting.'

Hence, knowing to 'sufficient' is sufficient

for constant sufficiency.

When the world is governed according to Tao,

Horses are used to work on the farm.

When the world is not governed according to Tao,

Horses and weapons are produced for the frontier.

No crime is greater than that of ambition.

No misfortune is greater than that of discontentment.

No fault is greater than that of conquering.

Therefore, to know contentment through contentment

Is to always have enough.

When there is Tao under Heaven, fleet-footed horses are working in the fields.

When there is no Tao under Heaven, war horses appear outside the city.

There is no greater crime than having wrong desires.

There is no greater hardship than being discontent.

There is no greater misfortune than obtaining one's own triumph.

That is why he who feels content is always content.

When the empire possessed the Tao,

Galloping horses were turned back to manure the fields;

When the empire has lost the Tao,

War-horses are bred on the frontier.

No crime is greater than indulging in greed;

No misfortune is greater than not knowing content;

No catastrophe is more grievous than thirsting for gain.

Therefore, the content of knowing content

Makes one constantly content.

When Tao rules the world

Racehorses are harnessed to the garbage cart in the fields.

When Tao does not rule the world

War-horses graze in the meadows on the outskirts of the city.

There is no greater sin than going after what man desires,

There is no greater sorrow than not knowing a measure of contentment,

There is no greater obstacle than falling into the pit of greed.

Therefore, it is sufficient for you to know a measure of contentment in order to know contentment in proportion, so as to satisfy your measure.

When the way prevails in the empire, fleet-footed horses are relegated to ploughing
in the fields;

When the way does not prevail in the empire, war-horses breed on the border.

There
is no crime greater than having too many desires;

There is no disaster greater than not being content;

There is no misfortune greater than being covetous.

Hence
in being content, one will always have enough.

Moderation of Desire

When the world possesses Reason, race horses are reserved for hauling dung. When the world is without Reason, war horses are bred in the common.

No greater sin than yielding to desire. No greater misery than discontent. No greater calamity than greed.

Therefore, he who knows content's content is always content.

With the Tao, everything serves a natural creative function. With man, weapons are made to destroy. Desire creates fear and violence. Without desire there is no fear. Free from fear you are eternal.

When the world is governed by Direction, horses haul manure.

When the world is not governed by Direction, mares foal near [war] location.

No calamity is greater than not being content;

No fault is greater than the desire to gain at any cost.

Thus, one who is content in being content is always content.

When all beneath heaven abides in Way, fast horses are kept to work the fields.

When all beneath heaven forgets Way, war horses are bred among the fertility altars.

What calamity is greater than no contentment, and what flaw greater than the passion for gain?

The contentment of fathoming contentment - there lies the contentment that endures.

When Tao prevails in the world,

Horses walk in the field to fertilize.

When Tao is missing in the world,

Military horses give births in the suburbs.

No guilt is greater than insatiable desires;

No misfortune is greater than mindless discontent;

No sin is greater than uncontrollable greed.

Therefore,

He who knows the contentment of being contented,

Will always be contented.

When
the world is present with tao

It happens that even galloping horses fertilize

When the world is absent of tao

War-horses exist in the suburbs.

No
calamity is greater than relating to not knowing enough

No fault is greater than relating to the desire to obtain.

So know the enough of being enough

There is entirely enough to go with each.

When the Principle reigns (in perfect peace), war horses work in the fields. When the Principle is forgotten, (war horses are the order of the day) And they are raised even in the suburbs of the towns.

To give in to one's covetousness (And this includes the mania for waging war), is the worst of crimes. Not to know how to control oneself, is the worst of nasty things. The worst of faults is to want more, always.

Those who know how to say 'enough is enough', are always content.

When the world has the Tao

Fast horses are retired to fertilize the grounds

When the world lacks the Tao

Warhorses must give birth on the battlefield

There is no crime greater than greed

No disaster greater than discontentment

No fault greater than avarice

Thus the satisfaction of contentment

Is the lasting satisfaction

When the world follows the Tao, harmony prevails. People know contentment and there is peace between nations. Since there is no war, fast horses no longer have a military function, so they are taken off the army and redirected to till farmlands in order to fertilize them for crops.

When the world does not follow the Tao, strife prevails. People bicker among themselves and nations clash endlessly. Because of constant warfare, all the horses are drafted into battle, so that even pregnant mares end up having to give birth on the battlefield.

The driving force behind warfare and conflicts is excessive desire at the expense of others. That is why there is no greater crime than greed, no greater disaster than not knowing when one has enough, and no greater fault than avarice, or covetousness.

From all this we can see that the satisfaction we can derive from the feeling of contentment - at any level of material possession - is the true and lasting source of bliss and peace of mind. It is the self-sufficiency of those who follow the Tao.

LIMITATION OF DESIRE

When the world yields to Tao, race horses will be used to haul manure. When the world ignores Tao war horses are pastured on the public common.

There is no sin greater than desire. There is no misfortune greater than discontent. There is no calamity greater than acquisitiveness.

Therefore to know extreme contentment is simply to be content.

When the world practices Tao,

Fast horses are used for their dung.

When the world does not practice Tao,

War horses give birth at the borders.

Among offenses (tsui), none is greater than having what is desirable.

Among calamities (huo), none is greater than not knowing contentment.

Among blames (chiu), none is greater than the desire for gain.

Therefore the contentment that comes from knowing contentment

Is a long lasting contentment.

Contentment

When the world follows Tao, racehorses work on farms. When the world forsakes Tao, cavalry horses practice in parks.

The greatest curse is being discontent. It is the greatest misery. The greatest sin is selfish striving. Being content with contentment is to be always satisfied.

When the kingdom is in harmony with the Tao,

the horses haul manure.

When the kingdom departs from the Tao,

war–horses are bred in the land.

There is no greater curse than wanting more than enough.

There is no greater sin than greed.

He who knows when enough is enough always has enough.

Forty-six

When the Tao is present in the universe,

The horses haul manure.

When the Tao is absent from the universe,

War horses are bred outside the city.

There is no greater sin than desire,

No greater curse than discontent,

No greater misfortune than wanting something for oneself.

Therefore he who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.

When the Tao prevails in the world,

The battle steeds are returned to farmers for tilling the fields;

When the Tao does not prevail in the world,

Even pregnant mares are taken over for wars.

No crime is greater than greediness;

No disaster is greater than the lack of contentment;

Thus the contentment of feeling content

Is an eternal contentment.

When Tao prevails under Heaven,

Fleet-footed horses are taken out [of service] to fertilize the fields.

When Tao fails to prevail under Heaven,

War horses breed on the sacred mounds outside the city walls.

No misfortune is greater than not knowing contentment;

No calamity is greater than wanting to possess.

Therefore, he who knows the sufficiency of contentment

Is always contented.

When Dao prevails, thoroughbred horses plough the land.

When Dao is in decline, cavalry horses give birth near the battlefields.

There is no curse worse than insatiable greed.

There is no misfortune worse than unquenchable desire.

Only a person who knows when enough is enough is always contented.

Moderation of Desire

Chien Yu

When the world goes in accord with Tao,

Horses are used for hauling manure.

When the world is out of keeping with Tao,

Horses are reared in the suburbs for war.

No sin is greater than yielding to desires;

No misfortune greater than not knowing contentment;

No fault greater than hankering after wealth.

Therefore, know contentment!

He who knows contentment is always content.

When the Tao is reigning on the earth,

Racehorses are harnessed to dung-carts;

When the Tao is not reigning on the earth,

War-horses are bred even in the fields outside the city walls.

There is no greater fault than yielding to uncurbed desire;

There is no greater unhappiness than discontent with what one has,

No greater calamity than greed and craving.

For "the content that comes from bwing content is an enduring content."

When beneath-heaven has Tao,

Race horses are used to haul dung.

When beneath-heaven has no Tao,

War horses breed in the countryside.

No calamity is greater

Than not knowing what is enough.

No fault worse than wanting too much.

Whoever knows what is enough

Has enough.

When the people of the world live in accord with the subtle Way of the universe,

horses are used for agricultural purposes.

When the people of the world do not live in accord with the subtle Way of the universe,

then horses, even pregnant mares, are driven into the battlefield and bred there.

There is no greater calamity for a nation, or for an individual,

than not finding contentment with one's own sufficiency.

There is no greater mistake for a nation, or for an individual,

than to be covetous.

Hence, when one is content within one's own nature, one will always have enough.

XLVI.

Sparing
of Desires

With
the world in step with Tao horses work upon the farms,

When
the Tao is disregarded they respond to war s alarms,

And are
bred in border waste and wilderness;

There

is
no greater sin than to sanction fell desire,

Than
a discontented life no calamity more dire,

None
greater than the grasping to possess;

And
he who knows contentment has the all-sufficient cure,

And
satisfied, will evermore endure.

When Tao was manifested to men,

Horses were used for cultivating the fields.

When Tao was hid within itself,

War horses were reared on the frontiers.

There is no sin greater than desire,

There is no misfortune greater than discontent,

There is no calamity greater than the wish to acquire,

Therefore to be satisfied is an everlasting sufficiency.

When the world is

in possession of

the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

The galloping horses

are led to fertilize

the fields

with their droppings.

( People create goods for exchange and

contend with each other in sport.)

When the world

has become

Taoless ( without the Laws of the Universe ),

War horses

breed themselves in the suburbs.

(People create tools of destruction and

contend with each other over the ownership of countries.)

There is no disaster

like not knowing

what is enough.

There is no evil

like greed.

They

who know

what

is enough

will

always

have enough.

When the Empire has the Way, (even) coursers will be stabled for the sake of their dung.

When the Empire is without the Way, warhorses will be raised in the suburb.

No guilt is greater than to approve of desire.

No disaster is greater than not to know what is enough.

No fault is greater than the desire to acquire.

For, to know that enough is enough is to have always enough.

When the Tao prevails in the world, they send back their swift

horses to (draw) the dung-carts. When the Tao is disregarded in the

world, the war-horses breed in the border lands.

There
is no guilt greater than to sanction ambition; no calamity

greater than to be discontented with one's lot; no fault greater than

the wish to be getting. Therefore the sufficiency of contentment is

an enduring and unchanging sufficiency.

When DEI-ty prevails under heaven,
swift horses are prized for their
fertilizing of fields;
but when DEI-ty has been forgotten under heaven,

war-horses are bred even in the suburbs!
No
guilt is greater than Egoic motivations;
no disaster is greater than Egoic
discontent;
no crime is greater than the Egoic desire for gain.
Therefore,
Contentment that derives from knowing when to be Content
is Eternal Contentment.

When
the absolute is cherished

Horses graze on the open green

When the absolute is lost

Only steeds of war are seen

No
calamity exceeds desire

And always wanting more

Can you not see you have enough

And live in plenitude galore?

WHEN the world is in possession of the Tao,

The galloping horses are led to fertilize the fields with their droppings.

When the world has become Taoless,

War horses breed themselves on the suburbs.

There is no calamity like not knowing what is enough.

There is no evil like covetousness.

Only he who knows what is enough will always have enough.

When the world is in accord with the Tao horses work and fertilize the fields with their droppings,

When The Way is forgotten, warhorses are bred and feed on the people's autumn harvest in the parks of the suburbs.

There is no worse calamity than desire,

There is no greater misery than knowing no contentment,

There is no greater catastrophe than losing self-control.

Contentment can come from realizing one has enough,

Attaining contentment, one can attain internal peace.

When the world follows the Tao,

horses run free to fertilize the fields.

When the world does not follow the Tao,

war horses are bred outside the cities.

There
is no greater transgression

than condoning peoples selfish desires,

no greater disaster than being discontent,

and no greater retribution than for greed.

Whoever
knows contentment will be at peace forever.

The well-run group is not a battlefield of egos. Of course there will be conflict, but these energies become creative forces.

If the leader loses sight of how thing happen, quarrels and fear devastate the group field.

This is a matter of attitude. There is nothing to win or lose in group work. Making a point does not shed light on what is happening. Wanting to be right blinds people.

The wise leader knows that it is far more important to be content with what is actually happening than to get upset over what might be happening but isn't.

When the World keeps to the Tao

Strong horses are best used to manufacture manure.

When the World forgets the Tao

War horses are bred outside the city.

There is no greater curse than discontent.

Nothing breeds trouble like greed.

Only one who is content with what is enough

will be content always.

l

When
the world remembers its oneness,

horses plow the fields.

When the world focuses on the manifestations of

Infinity,

distinctions, judgment and war replace peace

and harmony.

There
is no greater confusion than desire;

no greater burden than discontent.

Nothing is as unfortunate as seeing one's self

as separate from others.

Peace
and harmony come from the realization

that what one has is enough.

When there is Tao under Heaven, loose horses manure the fields.

When Tao is absent under Heaven, war horses are bred on the borders.

There is no misfortune so great as not recognizing excess.

There is no mistake so great as the desire to obtain.

Therefore feel content, be content, and stay content.

When Tao is present in the world

Racehorses are taken off to work in the fields.

When Tao is absent from the world

War-horses are bred in the countryside.

There is no crime greater than having desires.

No disaster is greater than not being content with one's lot.

The worst misfortune is to be greedy.

He who is content with what he has

Has enough.

With the Way, horses are used for farming.

With the Way lost, horses give births in battlefields.

No disaster is worse than greed.

No fault is worse than desire.

Therefore, one who can be easily satisfied

Will be always satisfied.

When the world has Tao, they have no use for saddle horses, using them to haul manure. When the world has no Tao, they raise war horses on sacred ground.

Nothing is more crime producing than desirable things nothing is a worse misfortune than not being content nothing makes for more guilt than desire for gain.

Yes: Be content with enough, and there will always be enough.

If the state lives according to the laws of Tao, then horses are used for tilling land.

But when the nation renounced Tao, then warhorses run over fields.

There is no greater affliction than uncontrolled worldly passions! Nothing destroys man more than the desire to multiply "earthly" treasures!

He who is satisfied with what he has is always happy!

When people follow the Tao Way,

Community's horses are in the field at work.

When people do not follow the Tao Way,

Community's horses are ready for war,

Thus, there is no work in the field.

There
is no grater error, but wishes out of vanity.

There is no grater suffering, but lack of contempt.

There is no grater calamity, but greed.

Because for the one who doesn't have many wishes, nothing is missing,

He is contempt with what he has.

Not looking to obtain anything from anyone,

The field is thus cultivated.

When
the Dao prevails in the world, fleet-footed horses are turned back [to the fields]
in order to fertilize them. When the Dao does not prevail in the world, war
horses are foaled in the outskirts of the cities. {There is no greater transgression
than condoning desire.) There is no greater disaster than failing to know when
you have enough. There is no greater retribution than acquisitiveness. So the
adequacy of knowing when you have enough is [itself] a constant adequacy.

In a world with Tao,

racing horses are drawn back [to the fields] for dung.

In a world without Tao,

war horses are raised outside the city.

No crime is greater than having desires.

No calamity is greater than not knowing contentment.

No fault is greater than longing for gain.

Therefore, the contentment of knowing contentment is always contentment.

Knowing Enough

When the world possesses the Tao,

Even fast horses are used for their dung.

When the world is without the Tao,

War-horses are raised in the suburbs.

There is no greater misfortune

Than not knowing what is enough.

There is no greater fault

Than desiring to acquire.

Therefore know that enough is enough.

There will always be enough.

Fear is an illusion. An illusion is a lie to the truth. In line with the Dao, plant flowers. Out of line, plant bodies.

When the Way rules the world,

Coach horses fertilize the fields;

When the Way does not rule,

War horses breed in the parks.

No
sin can exceed

Incitement to envy;

No calamity's worse

Than to be discontented,

Nor is there an omen

More dreadful than coveting.

But once be contented,

And truly you'll always be so.

When state politics are on the right track, war horses are used in farming.

When state politics are off track, even mares with foal have to be used in battle.

There is no calamity greater than discontentment.

There is no guilt greater than covetousness.

Therefore the contentment with knowing contentment is always contented.

When the Dao prevails among all under Heaven, one relegates coursers to producing manure.

When the Dao does not prevail among all under Heaven, war horses are born in the fields outside towns.

Nothing causes greater disaster than not being content, and nothing brings about greater blame than craving something.

When contentment fills one perfectly, this is indeed constant contentment!

1. When the world has the Way, ambling horses are retired to fertilize [fields].

2. When the world lacks the Way, war horses are reared in the suburbs.

3.
Of crimes—none is greater than having things that one desires;

4. Of disasters—none is greater than not knowing when one has enough.

5. Of defects—none brings more sorrow than one desire to attain.

6. Therefore, the contentment one has when he knows that he has enough, is abiding
contentment indeed.

"When the
world is right with Tao,"

Lao Tzu said,

"horses haul fertilizer to the fields.

When the world loses touch with Tao,

horses are trained for cavalry."

Nothing is more
insidious than possession.

Nothing is more dangerous than desire.

Nothing is more disastrous than greed.

If you know
when enough is enough,

you will always have enough.

.

Contentment

When the world lives in accord with the Way,

horses work on farms.

When the world does not live in accord with the Way,

the cavalry practices in the parks.

The greatest temptation to crime is desire.

The greatest curse is discontent.

The greatest calamity is greed.

Whoever is content with contentment is always content.

When Tao prevails on earth war-horses pull the plough.

When Tao is lacking cavalry horses trample down the fields.

Nothing is more unwholesome than greedy desires nothing more disastrous than attachment nothing more grievous than greed.

One who is content has always enough.

On Contentment

Lao Tze says,

When the world lives in accord with the Tao, racing horses are sent to the dung-cart.

When the world lives not in accord with the Tao, the war-horses breed on the border.

There is no sin greater than to sanction ambition;

no calamity greater than not being contented;

no fault greater than the wish to obtain.

Therefore, he who is content with contentment shall be always content.

MODERATING DESIRE AND AMBITION

When
the way of nature is observed,

all things serve their function;

horses drawing carts, and pulling at the plough.

But when the natural way is not observed,

horses are bred for battle and for war.

Desire
and wanting cause discontent,

whilst he who knows sufficiency

more easily has what he requires.

When a country is in harmony with the Tao,

the factories make trucks and tractors.

When a country goes counter to the Tao,

warheads are stockpiled outside the cities.

There is no greater illusion than
fear,

no greater wrong than preparing to defend yourself,

no greater misfortune than having an enemy.

Whoever can see through all fear

will always be safe.

When the world was under the rule of Dao, horses were distributed to cultivate farms.

When the world was without the rule of Dao, horses were armed and brought to battlefields.

No fault if greater than excessive desire.

No calamity is greater than to know no satisfaction.

No sin is greater than excessive gain.

To know satisfaction is to be always satisfied.

When there is Tao in the world, work horses are used to fertilize the land.

Without Tao in the world, the war horse flourishes in the countryside.

There is no crime greater than fostering desire.

There is no disaster greater than not knowing when there is enough.

There is no fault greater than wanting to possess.

Knowing that sufficiency is enough always suffices.

XLVI

When
the world has the way, people do what the want

When it loses the way, they are forced to do what they're told

There is no greater crime than wanting too much

No disaster more total than not knowing when to stop

No flaw more serious than the grasping hand

Know
what enough is, know when you have it, and be content

That is wisdom

When the World Has the Way

When the world has the Way,

running horses are retired to till the fields.

When the world lacks the Way,

war-horses are bred in the countryside.

No crime is greater than approving of greed;

no calamity is greater than discontent,

no fault is greater than possessiveness.

So the satisfaction of contentment is always enough.

When Tao is dominant, the fast horse is used for farming.

When Tao is lost, the female horse is used for war and gives birth in the field.

The worst misfortune is insatiability.

The worst mistake is rapacity.

Therefore, content from knowing enough makes people always satisfied.

When the world is reigned by the Way, the galloping horses are led to fertilize the fields with their droppings.

When the world is wayless, war horses breed themselves on the suburbs.

There is no greater calamity than not knowing "enough".

There is no greater evil than will to gain.

Therefore "enough" of knowing "enough" is constant "enough".

When the world follows Tao,

the horses haul manure.

When the world abandoned Tao.

War horses run wild.

There is no greater sin than unable to be satisfied.

No greater misfortune than wanting and wanting.

Thus, he who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.

When the Tao prevails in the world

swift horses are used to fertilize the fields.

When the Tao is unheeded

war horses are bred on the border lands.

There
is no greater offense than harboring desires.

There is no greater disaster than discontent.

There is no greater misfortune than wanting more.

Hence,
if you are content

You will always have enough.

When
the way is followed

railroad tracks become bicycle paths

king
lots and highways get plowed under

oil cushions the crust of the earth.

When the way is not followed

railroads haul weapons and fuel

food and energy are stockpiled

the earth is bled away and sold.

No
motive is more compelling

than wanting what others have

no illness more debilitating

than dissatisfaction with what one has

no better forecast of failure

than wanting more.

Knowing

the satisfaction

of being content

with the simple life

a wise person will always be satisfied.

When dao reigns in the kingdom, galloping horses are turned back to fertilise
certain fields with their manure. If the world in accord with dao, racing horses
are turned back to pull refuse carts.

When the world hardly lives in accord with dao, dao doesn't prevail or win.
Next war horses will be reared even on a sacred hill below the city walls, and
blatant cavalry will frolic in the countryside, driving and riding pestering
war horses in suburbs in between. Dao does hardly prevail if war is on in city
suburbs.

No lure is greater than to possess what others want.

There's no greater guilt than [sudden] discontent. There's (...) greater disaster
than greed. [Eventually] there's hardly a greater sin than desire for possession.

No disaster could be greater than [...] to be content with what one has [in
dire need and disabling poverty]. No presage of [airy] evil is greater than
men wanting to get more.

He who has once known the pure [orgasm] contentment that comes simply through
being content [at its peak], gets rather content-centred a long time after.

When the Way prevails under heaven,

swift horses are relegated to fertilizing fields.

When the Way does not prevail under heaven,

war-horses breed in the suburbs.

No guilt is greater than giving in to desire,

No disaster is greater than discontent,

No crime is more grievous than the desire for gain.

Therefore,

Contentment that derives from knowing when to be content is eternal contentment.

When Tao is in the world, horses are used in the pastureland.

When Tao has left the world, chargers are reared in the wilderness.

There is no greater sin than indulging desire.

There is no greater pain than discontent.

There is nothing more disastrous than the greed of gain.

Hence the satisfaction of contentment is an everlasting competence.

Of What Are You Afraid?

All that is negative

and injurious to your relationship

is born of fear.

Fear births jealousy,

fuels anger,

and prompts harsh words.

The most difficult times

contain the greatest fear.

If you would live in love,

do not be afraid.

My spouse and I are furthest apart

when we are the most afraid.

But when the fears are spoken and faced,

our intimacy is not only restored

but deepened.

Ask yourselves the question,

"Of what are we afraid?"

Honest answers, mindfully spoken

and courageously heard,

will set you free.

When Tao prevails in the world, galloping horses are turned back to
fertilize (the fields with the dung). When Tao does not prevail in the
world, war horses thrive in the suburbs.

There is no calamity greater than lavish desires. There is no greater
guilt than discontentment. And there is no greater disaster than greed.

He who is contented with contentment is always contented.

In a land where
the way of life is understood

Race-horses are led back to serve the field;

In a land where the way of life is not understood

War-horses are bred on the autumn yield.

Owning is the entanglement,

Wanting is the bewilderment,

Taking is the presentiment:

Only he who contains content

Remains content.

When the DAO rules, even the great war horses are used to plow the field,

When the DAO is overruled, even the pregnant horses are used in battle.

The biggest disaster is not knowing when to be satisfied,

The biggest mistake is to always want more.

Therefore, knowing when to be satisfied is the ever-lasting satisfaction.

When the world follows the Tao,

Horses are used to fertilize the farm fields.

When the world does not follow the Tao,

Even mares are expended to breed in the battlefields.

When the individual follows the Tao,

Energy is used in his harmonious inner development.

When the individual does not follow the Tao,

Energy is expended in his continuous inner conflict.

There is no greater vice than giving in to greed,

No greater calamity than not knowing contentment,

No greater imputation than succumbing to covetousness.

Therefore, know and be content with what is enough,

Then you will always have enough.

With the Way, horses are used for farming.

With the Way lost, horses give births in battlefields.

No disaster is worse than greed.

No fault is worse than desire.

Therefore, one who can be easily satisfied

Will be always satisfied.

When the world is in accord with the Tao horses work and fertilize the fields with their droppings,

When The Way is forgotten, war-horses are bred and feed on the people's autumn harvest in the parks of the suburbs.

There is no worse calamity than desire,

There is no greater misery than knowing no contentment,

There is no greater catastrophe than losing self-control.

Contentment can come from realizing one has enough,

Attaining contentment, one can attain internal peace.

