===== Chapter 66 =====

Those who are [in] the position where the large rivers [meet] the sea

Can thereby become the king of the hundred mountain streams.

Because they are skilled at humbling themselves

Is the reason they can become the king of the hundred mountain streams.

Therefore, the sages

Wishing to be above people

Must [do so] by means of speaking humbly to them.

Wishing to be first [among] people

Must [do so] by means of [placing] themselves behind them.

Therefore, the sages

Are placed on top, and the people are not burdened.

Placed in front, and the people are not harmed.

Therefore, the world is glad to push [them] forward

And does not get tired [of them].

Because they do not contend

Is the reason no one in the world

Is able to contend with them.

Rivers and seas Can rule the hundred valleys Because they are good at lying low They are lords of the valleys.

Therefore those who would be above Must speak as if they are below Those who would lead Must speak as if they are behind.

In this way the Sage dwells above And the people are not burdened.
Dwells in front And they are not hindered. Therefore the whole world Is
delighted and unwearied.

Since the Sage does not contend No one can contend with the Sage.

How can rivers and oceans be king of one hundred valleys?

They excel in staying below them.

That is why they can become their king.

Thus if the sage wishes to be the people's master

He has to talk to them like their servant.

If he wishes to lead them

He has to follow behind them.

This way he can be their master

Without oppressing them.

He can precede them

Without blocking their way.

That is why the whole world is willing to praise him

And never tires of doing so.

He contends with no one,

So no one can contend with him.

HUMILITY

How much greater are the oceans and seas

Than the many lesser streams they rule.

The grand oceans and seas -

Obtaining their greatness and dominion, by being lower,

Receive thereby, the homage of hundreds of streams.

The Sage,

In order to be over people to guide them,

Places himself beneath them, serving them with humility.

In order to lead them,

Must follow behind them.

Accordingly, the Sage is truly over people,

Leading them without oppressing them.

Standing before them, protects them from harm.

All people, tirelessly lending him support,

Follow him.

Not competing with anyone,

None contend with him.

Great rivers and seas can rule the hundred valleys because they are positioned below to receive the water.

In this way, they rule the hundred valleys.

The people are positive that their deep-seated desires are of the highest nature and justify them with inferior speech.

Deep-seated desires began for people when the body was put second.

There is a reason the sages do not engage with or give weight to the people's deep-seated desires.

They stop in front of the deep-seated desires and the people do not suffer (from their own deep-seated desires).

This is because Heaven below (the sacred body) is joyfully supported and not beyond its limits.

Accordingly it does not compete.

Therefore, Heaven below is without the ability to join with the deep-seated desires and compete.

PUTTING ONE'S SELF LAST

The oceans and the rivers attract the streams by their skill in being

lower than they; thus are they masters thereof. So the Wise Man, to be

above men, speaketh lowly; and to precede them acteth with humility.

Thus,
though he be above them, they feel no burden; nor, though he

precede them, do they feel insulted.

So
then do all men delight to honour him, and grow not weary of him. He

contendeth not against any man; therefore no man is able to contend

against him.

That whereby the rivers and seas are able to receive the homage andtribute of all the valley streams, is their skill in being lower than they;-itis thus that they are the kings of them all. So it is that the sage, wishingto be above men, puts himself by his words below them, and wishing to bebefore them, places his person behind them. In this way though he has hisplace above them, men do not feel his weight, nor though he has his placebefore them, do they feel it an injury to them. Therefore all in the worlddelight to exalt him and do not weary of him. Because he does not strive,no one finds it possible to strive with him.

Why are the seas and rivers the biggest among all waters?

Because they are located on the lowest places

Therefore they are the biggest

So one who is wise among fools must be the least

And therefore he is the greatest

But fools won't consider him as a threat

They just don't understand him and take no notice of him

Because he doesn't fight and argue with anybody, he is indisputable

Rivers and seas dominate the landscape, Because, by being good at seeking the lowest places, they fill and occupy and spread over everything.

Likewise the intelligent man is superior to others, Because he admits that he is inferior, And he is a leader of others Because he is willing to be a follower.

Thus although he is actually superior to others, they do not feel depressed. And when he leads them, they do not feel that they are being forced to obey. So all are happy to give him their support.

Since he competes with no one, no one competes with him.

How did the great rivers and seas get their kingship

Over the hundred lesser streams?

Through the merit of being lower than they;

That was how they got their kingship.

Therefore the Sage

In order to be above the people

Must speak as though he were lower than the people.

In order to guide them

He must put himself behind them.

Only thus can the Sage be on top and the people not be crushed by his weight.

Only thus can he guide, and the people not be led into harm

Indeed in this way everything under heaven will into harm be pushed by him

And will not find his guidance irk-some.

This he does by not striving;

And because he does not strive, none can contend with him.

Rivers rule valleys and seas rule rivers

because they take the lower position.

The sage is elevated by placing himself below others.

He leads by leaving himself behind.

When he assumes high position, the people do not feel his weight.

When he rules they do not feel threatened.

The realm rejoices and never tires of his presence.

Because he does not contend, nothing stands against him.

What is the reason why the rivers and ocean

can serve as sovereign to the hundred valleys?

Because they are so well below them

In this way (they) can act as sovereign

to the hundred valleys

Applying this, in desiring to rise above the people,

Always in expression be subordinate to them

In desiring to go ahead of the people

Always regard yourself as behind them

This is how wise ones remain above

And yet the people are not burdened

Remain ahead

And yet the people are not obstructed

So it is that (all) under heaven readily come forward

and never weary

Because such as these will never contend

So none under heaven can contend against them

Lead by following

The reason why rivrs and oceans are able

to be the kings of the hundred valleys is

that they are good at being below them.

For this reason they are able to be the kings

of the hundred valleys.

Therefore in the Sage's desire to be above the people,

He must in his speach be below them.

if he would lead them, he must follow behind.

And in his desire to be at the front of the people

He must in his person be behind them;

Thus he dwells above,

Yet the people do not regard him as heavy;

And he dwells in front,

Yet the people do not regard him as posing a threat.

The whole world delights in his praise

and never tires of him.

It is not because he is not contentious,

That as a result, no one in the world

can content with him.

The sea is king of the valleys and streams because it is willing to be beneath them.

One who wishes to guide the people should be humble in her speech toward them. One who wishes to lead the people must learn the art of following them.

The sage is above the people, but they don't feel her weight. She stays ahead of the people, and no harm comes to them. She has the affection of the whole world.

Because she contends with no one, no one can contend with her.

Breadth of river, depth of sea-

How is it that they seem to rule the world?

Because they can infiltrate a kingdom,

Or plumb the depths of a ravine,

And give life to the hundred fertile valleys.

In leading others, learn first to follow.

In speech, let your words find their own level.

To lead the people, learn to nourish them.

Let the Sage be your model:

It dwells in leadership

Without the oppression of superiority.

It dwells in leadership,

Yet the Sage offends no one.

Thus is it honored by all who approach it,

For it never exhausts them.

It is sublime, benevolent:

And therefore no one competes with it.

Lao Tzu here continues his discussion of the theme of leadership from the previous poem. When leaders of the people allow the Sage to guide them in their work, they become like water. It doesn't calculate its flowing course, but simply follows the shape of the land wherever it leads, whether through a king's domain or into the depths of a ravine. As it travels, the water nourishes the land that receives it, in a dance of complementarity: the land provides the space and direction for the water's movement, and the water returns to it the elements necessary for fertile growth. Thus does the poet advise leaders: "learn first to follow," and then "learn to nourish." In nature, neither the water nor the land put on airs of superiority, control, or command, but each provides the other what it needs to realize its destiny. This is the way to lead people: follow the shape of their needs and circumstances, and then ask for the guidance of the Sage in providing them the direction and sustenance they need to fulfill their destiny. Thus, you will not offend them, because they will not perceive you as a superior; and you will never exhaust them, because they will not see you as a competitive force. This is the way of true benevolence.

To Lead, Appear to Follow

Why
do rivers and seas have dominion over lowlands?

Because the one lowers itself to the other.

To
be elevated by the people,

speak like their inferior.

To lead the people, walk behind them.

Thus
the truly wise are above,

but people do not feel their weight.

They walk in front,

but people do not feel blocked.

The
whole world respects

and never grows tired of such leadership.

Because the truly wise are not aggressive,

no one attacks them.

That which enables the rivers and the seas to become the rulers of all the water-courses in their ability to remain in the lowest; it is on this account that they are the rulers of them all. In like manner the Holy Man, if he wishes to direct the people must speak of himself as subject to them; if he wishes to lead them he must

put himself in the background. Hence the Sages are supreme, but the people are not burdened; they are in the vanguard, but the people are not harmed. For this reason the whole Empire delights to exalt them, and no one feels annoyance. Because they do to strive there is none who can strive with them.

As Tao is to the world, so are streams and valleys to the rivers and seas.

Rivers and seas can be kings to all valleys because the former can well lower themselves to the latter.

Thus they become kings to all valleys.

Therefore the Sage, in order to be above the people, must in words keep below them;

In order to be ahead of the people, he must in person keep behind them.

Thus when he is above, the people do not feel his burden;

When he is ahead, the people do not feel his hinderance.

Therefore all the world is pleased to hold him in high esteem and never get tired of him.

Because he does not compete; therefore no one competes with him.

Strategic Reversal

The reason rivers and oceans can deem-act as kings of a hundred valleys:

Is that they are good-at lowering them.

Hence they are able to deem-act as king of a hundred valleys.

Using this: if you desire to elevate the people, you must use language to diminish
them.

If you desire to place the people first, you must treat them as less than your
body.

Using this: Sages occupy the upper position and the people are not important.

Occupy the prior position and the people are not harmed.

Using this: the social world happily promotes and does not resent.

It's because he does not dispute.

So in the social world, nothing disputes with him.

Rivers and seas become the leading powers over all the waters from the highlands

Because they place themselves in low positions before the other waters.

That is why rivers and seas become the leading powers over all the waters from the highlands.

Thus, when the ruler wishes to become the leader of his people,

He first humbles himself before them.

When he wishes to be in front of his people,

He first remains in back of them.

When he is in a high position, people do not feel his authority.

When he is in front of his people, they do not feel any obstruction.

Therefore, all the people want to support him, and no one dislikes him.

It is because he never contends with others that others are unable to quarrel with him.

Rivers and seas can be king of the hundred valleys,

only because they accept their lower position.

Therefore they can be king of the hundred valleys.

That is why the sage

who wishes to rule the people

must stay beneath them,

who wishes to lead the people

must follow behind them.

In this way the sage stays above the people,

yet does not oppress them.

He stays ahead of the people,

yet does not exhaust them.

Then the people will support him with joy and never tire of following him.

And because he does not fight, no one can fight against him.

The reason why rivers and oceans

Can become kings of a hundred valley streams

Is that they are good at lying below them;

Hence, they can become

Kings of a hundred valley streams.

Hence, when the sage man

Wished to be above the people,

He always placed himself below them in speech;

When he wished to be in front of the people,

He always stayed behind them in person.

Therefore, when he was above,

People did not consider him a burden;

When he was in front,

People did not consider him an obstacle.

All under heaven delighted in supporting him unwearily.

Is it not because he did not contend

That none under heaven could with him contend?

The best soldier does not love war,

The best warrior is not bloodthirsty,

The best conqueror does not take part in the war,

The best employer places himself beneath his workers.

That is called the virtue of self-control,

That is called the ability to be helped by others,

That is called the enlightenment that comes from uniting with heaven.

The reason why the River and the Sea are able to be king of the hundred valleys
is that they excel in taking the lower position.

Hence they are able to be king of the hundred valleys.

Therefore,
desiring to rule over the people,

One must in one's words humble oneself before them;

And, desiring to lead the people,

One must, in one's person, follow behind them.

Therefore
the sage takes his place over the people yet is no burden;

takes his place ahead of the people yet causes no obstruction.

That is why the empire supports him joyfully and never tires of doing so.

It
is because he does not contend that no one in the empire is in a position to
contend with him.

Putting Oneself Behind

That rivers and oceans can of the hundred valleys be kings is due to their excelling in lowliness. Thus they can of the hundred valleys be the kings.

Therefore the holy man, when anxious to be above the people, must in his words keep underneath them. When anxious to lead the people, he must with his person keep behind them.

Therefore the holy man dwells above, but the people are not burdened. He is ahead, but the people suffer no harm.

Therefore the world rejoices in exalting him and does not tire. Because he strives not, no one in the world will strive with him.

The ocean is the destination of all rivers. Why? Because it is placed below them. This shows the value of humility. A father, who parents his children with humility, follows them. By following them they will never feel oppressed and can develop naturally. His humility allows them to express themselves fully. He is beyond gratitude.

The sea is the king to hundreds of streams.

Because it is good at lying low, it can be the king to hundreds of streams.

Thus, a sage,

desirous of being the populace's superior, must be obsequious to them;

desirous of being in front of the populace, must follow them.

Thus, a sage,

sitting high, in no way burdens the populace;

standing in front, in no way harms the populace.

Thus, the world is happy to support [the sage] and is not tired of doing so.

Because [the sage] is not in competition, the people in the world cannot engage him/her in competition.

Oceans and rivers become emperors of the hundred valleys

because they stay so perfectly below them.

This alone makes them emperors of the hundred valleys.

So, wanting to rule over the people a sage speaks from below them, and wanting to lead the people he follows along behind them,

then he can reign above without weighing the people down and stay ahead without leading the people to ruin.

All beneath heaven rejoices in its tireless praise of such a sage.

And because he's given up contention,

nothing in all beneath heaven contends with him.

Why the large river or sea is able to be the king of hundred valley streams?

Because it lies well below them.

Therefore it becomes their king.

It follow that: He who governs the people must declare that he is to serve them;

He who lead the people must place himself behind them.

So a wise ruler:

Stays above, the people feel no burden;

Leads ahead, the people feel no threat.

Thus the world is not tired of happily supporting him.

Since he contends against no one,

Therefore no one in the world can contend against him.

In
the place of rivers and seas

The ability to act as that which is the king of one hundred
valleys happens

It happens they value being low

So the ability to act as the king of one hundred valleys
happens.

Appropriately
it happens that

Desire to be above people seeds the occurrence of words being
low

Desire to precede people seeds the occurrence of the body
following

Appropriately it happens that sages

Dwell above yet people lack heaviness

Dwell in front yet people are without being held back

Appropriately it happens

That the world joyfully supports them yet without tiring.

It
happens they lack contention

So in the world noone is able to be contending with them.

Why are the oceans and rivers kings of all the valleys? (receiving all the watercourses in tribute). Because they are benevolently the inferiors of all the valleys (with regard to levels). That is why all the water flows towards them.

Following this example, the Sage who wishes to become superior to the common people should speak in words beneath himself (speak very humbly of himself). If he wishes to become the first, he should put himself in last place, (and continue to do so, after he has been exalted).

He could then be elevated to the highest peak without the people feeling oppressed by him; he could be the first without the people complaining about him. The whole empire would serve him with joy, without becoming weary of him.

For, not being opposed to anyone, no one would be opposed to him.

Rivers and oceans can be the kings of a hundred valleys

Because of their goodness in staying low

So they can be the kings of a hundred valleys

Thus if sages wish to be over people

They must speak humbly to them

If they wish to be in front of people

They must place themselves behind them

Thus the sages are positioned above

But the people do not feel burdened

They are positioned in front

But the people do not feel harmed

Thus the world is glad to push them forward without resentment

Because they do not contend

So the world cannot contend with them

Rivers and oceans receive everything from the streams and rivulets of a hundred valleys. It is as if they are the rulers of all these valleys, receiving their tributes and offerings into the royal treasury.

The reason that rivers and oceans have dominion over the valleys is simple: It is their nature to occupy the lowest position. All the streams and rivulets of the valleys naturally flow into them.

Tao sages emulate nature. So when they observe the above, they realize that the principle applies equally well to human beings. If they wish to have influence over other people, they must occupy the lowest position like rivers and oceans. In other words, they must possess true humility and speak humbly to everyone.

Similarly, if the sages wish to lead people and be in front of them, they must place themselves behind them out of the same sense of humility. Because the sages are self-effacing and wish only to serve the greater good, people thrust them forward into positions of leadership.

As leaders, sages utilize the Tao rather than force or domination. People serve and assist them voluntarily, without coercion or pressure. Therefore, although the position of a sage ends up being above the followers, people do not feel burdened or oppressed. Although the sage is ahead of the masses, people do not feel threatened or harmed.

This Tao leadership builds relationships and promotes harmony, so people are happy to follow the sage to the ends of the earth. They do not resent the power wielded by the sages. In fact, they push the sages forward and urge that they accept the the mantle of power.

This is a very different concept from the conventional "might makes right" paradigm, where one seizes power by force and bullies others with it. The sages are the exact opposite. They have no need to seize anything or fight against anyone. Because of this, no one fights with them. Instead, the people support Tao leadership from the heart, and of their own free will!

TO SUBORDINATE SELF

The reason rivers and seas are called the kings of the valley is because they keep below them.

Therefore the wise man desiring to be above his people must in his demeanor keep below them; wishing to benefit his people, he must ever keep himself out of sight.

The wise man dwells above, yet the people do not feel the burden; he is the leader and the people suffer no harm. Therefore the world rejoices to exalt him and never wearies of him.

Because he will not quarrel with anyone, no one can quarrel with him.

Rivers and seas can be kings of the hundred valleys,

Because they are good at flowing downwards (hsia).

Therefore they can be kings of the hundred valleys.

Thus if you desire to be above the people,

Your words must reach down (hsia) to them.

If you desire to lead the people,

Your person (shen, body) must be behind them.

Thus the sage is above,

Yet the people do not feel his weight.

He stays in front,

Yet the people do not suffer any harm.

Thus all gladly praise him untiringly (pu yen).

Because he does not contend with any,

Therefore no one under heaven can contend with him.

To Lead Appear to Follow

Why do rivers and seas have dominion over lowlands? Because the one lowers itself to the other. To be elevated by the people, speak like their inferior. To lead the people, walk behind them. Thus the truly wise are above, but people do not feel their weight. They walk in front, but people do not feel blocked. The whole world respects and never grows tired of such leadership. Because the truly wise are not aggressive, no one is aggressive toward them.

Great rivers and seas are kings to hundreds of lesser streams

because they lie lower than the lesser streams.

To stand above, you must speak from below.

To lead, you must follow behind.

This is how the ruler who follows the Tao

stands above and leads the people.

And in this way,

the people are neither overburdened nor oppressed.

The whole nation supports such a ruler.

He contends with no one, and no one contends with him.

Sixty-six

Why is the sea king of a hundred streams?

Because it lies below them.

Therefore it is the king of a hundred streams.

If the sage would guide the people, he must serve with humility.

If he would lead them, he must follow behind.

In this way when the sage rules, the people will not feel oppressed;

When he stands before them, they will not be harmed.

The whole world will support him and will not tire of him.

Because
he does not compete,

He does not meet competition.

All the streamlets flow towards the river and the sea

Because the latter takes the lower positions,

Hence the latter becomes the king of countless valleys.

Therefore, if one wants to be the ruler of the people,

One must put oneself behind the people.

Thus the sage, though being placed high over the people,

Never burdens the people;

The sage, though going ahead of the people,

Never stands in the way of the people.

That is why the people hold him in esteem

And are never tired of him.

He contends with no one,

So no one in the world is able to contend with him.

The great rivers and seas are kings of hundred valleys,

Because they are good at keeping low.

That is why they can be kings of hundred valleys.

Therefore, if you want to stand above the people,

You must keep low in speaking to them.

If you want to stand ahead of the people,

You must put yourself behind them.

For this reason the sage

Is above the people yet does not weigh heavy on them;

He is ahead of the people yet causes no harm to them.

Therefore all under Heaven are happy to uphold him and never tire of him.

Because he does not contend,

No one under Heaven can contend with him.

How does the sea become the king of all waters?

It is because it is good at lying low.

Hence, it is the king of all waters.

Therefore, the sage must be modest in order to reign successfully.

In order to lead, the sage must follow the people wishes.

Consequently, when the sage reigns, people are not oppressed.

When the sage leads, the people are not suppressed.

Hence, the sage is esteemed and not hated.

As the sage does not contend,

No one can contend with him.

Apres Vous

Hou Chi

That rivers and seas can be kings of all valleys

Is because they are good in staying low.

That's why they can be kings of all valleys.

Thus the Sage wishing to be above the people

Always speaks as if he were inferior to them;

And wishing to lead the people,

Always places himself behind them.

So when the Sage occupies a high position,

The people do not feel any oppression;

And when he occupies a leading position,

The people do not receive any harm.

Therefore the world is glad to support him,

And never gets tired of doing so.

Because he does not contend,

No one in the world can contend with him.

Oceans and mighty rivers are as kings to all the valleys, because they lower themselves to thelevel of the valleys:

That is why they are as kings of the valeys.

Therefore the Sage, if he would be above the people, must in speech seem to put himself below the people.

IF he would lead the people, he must place himself behind them.

Thus: although he is above the people, he is not a burden to them;

Although he goes ahead of the people, he does not block their way.

Thus: the whole world willingly follows and esteems him and is not irked by him.

And because he does not contend, no one contends with him.

Rivers and seas become the kings of the valleys

Because they lie lower:

That is why they become kings.

Hence the sage,

Wishing to be higher than the people,

Keeps his speech lower;

Wishing to lead the people,

Puts himself behind them.

For the sage

Stays above the people,

But they don't feel weight;

Stays in front,

But they don't feel hurt.

Thus, beneath-heaven

Gladly upholds him

And does not weary of him.

Because he does not compete,

Nobody beneath heaven can compete with him.

How does the sea become the queen of all rivers and streams?

By lying lower than they do!

Hence, it is the queen of all rivers and streams.

One who humbles himself, therefore, can serve all people.

By putting himself last, he comes to be their leader.

Thus, when one of subtle virtue is set above people,

they do not feel that he is their burden.

And, when he stands in front of people,

they do not feel that he is an obstruction to them.

Therefore, the world follows one of subtle virtue joyfully,

and never tires of doing so.

He does not compete with anyone,

thus he is above all competition.

LXVI.

To Put
Oneself Behind

Rivers
and seas!

Homage
and tribute from all the valley streams

Pour
into these;

They
lower themselves, and for this reason alone

Become
royalties.

So
the wise man,

If
ever he wish to be above other men,

In
his words will plan

To
remain below, and if he desire to lead,

Will
keep from the van.

And
in this way

Though
he dwell above, men will not feel his weight,

He
leads the array,

But
they feel that he is not an impediment,

Nor
in their way.

And
so his compeers

Unwearyingly exalt and honor him

With
joy and cheers,

And
since he does not strive, no strife with him

Ever
appears.

The Rivers and the Seas (because they seek a lowly place) are Lords of a hundred valleys

Let your love flow, seek a lowly place, you will be Lord of a hundred valleys.

That is why if the self-controlled man desires to exalt the people, in his speech he must take a lowly place; if he desires to put the put the people first he must put himself after them.

Thus, though he dwells above them, the people are not burdened by him

Though he is placed before them, the people are not obstructed by him,

Therefore men serve him gladly, they do not tire in serving him.

Because he does not strive, no one in the world can strive against him.

How does the sea become the King of all streams?

Because it lies lower than they!

That is why it is the king of all streams.

The Complete Thinker rules over the people by lowering themself in speech;

Leads the people by putting themself behind.

When a Complete Thinker stands above the people,

They do not feel the heaviness of weight;

When they stands in front of the people,

the people do not feel hurt.

All the world is glad to push them forward

without getting tired of them.

Because they compete with nobody,

Nobody can ever compete with them.

That by which the River and the sea are able to be kings of the hundred valleys, is their fitness to be lower than these. That is why they are able to be the kings of the hundred valleys.

Therefore, if a Saint wishes to be above the people, he should, in his words, be lower. If he wishes to be in front of the people, he should in his person, be behind.

Therefore the Saint stays above but the people do not feel his weight; he stays in front but the people do not feel it as an injury.

Therefore All-under-heaven will gladly push him forward and will not weary (of him), Because he strives not, none are able to strive with him.

That whereby the rivers and seas are able to receive the homage

and tribute of all the valley streams, is their skill in being lower

than they;--it is thus that they are the kings of them all. So it is

that the sage (ruler), wishing to be above men, puts himself by his

words below them, and, wishing to be before them, places his person

behind them.

In
this way though he has his place above them, men do not feel his

weight, nor though he has his place before them, do they feel it an

injury to them.

Therefore
all in the world delight to exalt him and do not weary of

him. Because he does not strive, no one finds it possible to strive

with him.

The River and the Sea can be Kings
over a hundred valley-streams

because they are good at lying below them.
If
Sages want to be be over the people, in teachings,
they must put themselves
beneath them.
If one wishes to lead the people,
one must stand behind
them.
Thus,
one may lead the people without offending them;
one may oversee the people
with one's teachings without burdening them;
everyone will happily push one
forward without tiring of one's example;
and is this not because one is free
of competition?
Because
one does not compete with the people, none can oppose you.

The
sea is large and mighty

Because it lies below

The streams and rivers of the world

Thus capturing their flow

If
you want to have your fill

Then you must see that you are hollow

If you want to lead the way

Then you must be prepared to follow

When
you lead you are above

But no one feels put down

And when you must be out in front

Know that no one's losing ground

When
you see that you're not built

For facing up or confrontation

No one can contend with you

Who are the ultimate negation

HOW does the sea become the king of all streams?

Because it lies lower than they!

Hence it is the king of all streams.

Therefore, the Sage reigns over the people by humbling himself in speech;

And leads the people by putting himself behind.

Thus it is that when a Sage stands above the people, they do not feel the heaviness of his weight;

And when he stands in front of the people, they do not feel hurt.

Therefore all the world is glad to push him forward without getting tired of him.

Just because he strives with nobody,

Nobody can ever strive with him.

The great rivers and streams all pour their tribute of the world onto the seas.

The seas gain this tribute and are called high and mighty because they lie low, humility gives the sea its power.

It is for this reason that the followers of Tao humble themselves before mankind.

They speak in tones of humility and lowborn status.

They do not attempt to lead, but learn to follow, and find themselves leading the people from behind.

In this way the wise sovereign will rule over the people, but they will not feel his weight.

He will lead the people, but they will not feel slighted or displeased.

The people will gladly uphold and support such a one as this.

The master does not strive, in this way no one can strive against him.

Rivers and seas are rulers

of the streams of hundreds of valleys

because of the power of their low position.

If
you want to be the ruler of people,

you must speak to them like you are their servant.

If you want to lead other people,

you must put their interest ahead of your own.

The
people will not feel burdened,

if a wise person is in a position of power.

The people will not feel like they are being manipulated,

if a wise person is in front as their leader.

The whole world will ask for her guidance,

and will never get tired of her.

Because she does not like to compete,

no one can compete with the things she accomplishes.

Why is the ocean the greatest body of water? Because it lies below all the rivers and streams and is open to them all.

What we call leadership consists mainly of knowing how to follow. The wise leader stays in the background and facilitates other people's process. The greatest things the does go largely unnoticed. Because the leader does not push or shape or manipulate, there is no resentment or resistance.

Group members genuinely appreciate a leader who facilitates their lives rather than promoting some personal agenda. Because the leader is open, any issue can be raised. Because the leader has no position to defend and shows no favouritism, no one feels slighted; no one wishes to quarrel.

Rivers and the sea are able to rule the streams of a hundred valleys.

Because they are good at taking the lower position,

The streams of a hundred valleys run to them.

Therefore, if you want to rule effectively over people

You must surely speak as if below them.

If you want to lead well,

You must surely walk behind them.

That way when the Sage takes a position of power

The people will not fee oppressed.

And when the Sage leads

The people will not think he is in the way.

Therefore the whole world joyfully praises him

and does not tire of him.

Because he refuses to compete,

The world cannot compete with him.

Why
are the great oceans the rulers of all rivers?

Because they occupy a lower space.

Therefore,
their humility lifts them up.

If
the sage is to manifest peace

she must be humble in her speech.

If
she is to lead others

she must follow them in harmony.

When
the sage leads,

the people do not feel enslaved.

When she stands above them,

they feel at one with her.

Because she is in harmony with others,

they support her and never

consider her a burden.

She
is not confused.

Therefore, she does not contend with others

and they do not contend with her.

The Ocean rules all Valleys because it lies below them,

and thus can be the King of all Valleys.

So the desire to be above the People requires speaking as if below them.

The desire to be before the People requires placing yourself behind.

Thus can the Wise Man be placed above, and the People are not burdened;

placed before, and the People are not harmed.

Thus does the world see Gladness, not Loathing.

He does not compete.

Therefore no one under Heaven competes against him.

Rivers and seas become the kings of the hundred streams

Because they keep to the lower position.

Thus they become their kings.

Therefore the Sage, wishing to rule over the people,

Must use humble words before them;

And wishing to lead the people,

He must keep himself behind them.

Thus the Sage rules over the people, and they do not feel oppressed;

He leads the people, and they do not feel obstructed.

Therefore all beneath Heaven support him and do not tire of him.

Because he does not compete, no one can compete with him.

The ocean can be the king of all deep places

Because it positions itself lowest in the world.

Similarly, the one who wants to be influential

Must first be humble in his speech and actions.

The one who wants to be the leader

Must first go back behind all others.

When such a leader is above, people will feel no weight.

When such a leader is in front, people will feel no hindrance.

He/She is therefore recommended without reservation,

For one who fights for nothing advances best.

The Yang-tze and the ocean: How are they able to be Kings of the hundred streams? Because they excel at being low - this is how they are able to be Kings of the hundred streams.

And so: Wishing to be high above the people, you must by your speech put yourself at the bottom Wishing to be out in front of the people, you must put your self in the last place.

And so, the Wise Person: Stands above, but the people are not weighed down stands out in front, but the people are not harmed and so the world delights in praising him, and does not tire.

Because of his not contending no one in the world can contend with him.

Great rivers became so powerful because they flow down into the sea accumulating in themselves water from the neighborhood.

The wise, who desires to help people, also has to put himself below others. Therefore, though he is superior to people, he is not a burden for them — and people do not harm him. People gladly follow him and do not turn away from him.

He does not compete with anyone and therefore he is unconquerable.

He constantly advances further — yet people do not envy him.

He does not struggle with anyone — thus no one in the whole world can force him to act against his will.

The water of a river follows always down the valley,

The river is thus the master of the valley.

To
gain people's hearts, is necessary to serve them,

To lead people, they must be followed.

Thus
being above people, the Wise Person

Does not look like an oppressor.

When the Wise Person stands in front of people,

They do not feel as being confronted.

Thus
the Wise Person is a living proof of his wisdom,

People around him have the feeling of being protected.

The
reason that the great rivers and the seas can be the kings of the hundred valleys
is that they are good at lying beneath them. Thus they can be the kings of the
hundred valleys. So if one would be superior to people, one must by words put
oneself beneath them. If one would lead the people, one must put one's person
(i.e., interests) behind them. For that reason, although the Sage is on top,
the people do not perceive him to be a burden. Although he is in front of them,
the people do not take that to be an injury. So the world takes joy in pushing
him to the fore and does not become tired of him. Because he does not contend,
no one in the world can contend with him.

Rivers and seas become the kings of one hundred valleys

Because they are able in putting themselves below;

So they can become their kings.

Therefore, for the sake of staying above the people,

The Sage must lower himself with words.

For the sake of staying ahead of the people,

He must put himself behind them.

Therefore, the Sage stays above and the people do not feel the burden.

He stays in front and the people do not consider him harmful.

Therefore the whole world delights in exalting him without tiring.

Because he does not compete,

The whole world cannot fight with him.

The Power in Staying Low

The rivers and seas lead the hundred streams

Because they are skillful at staying low.

Thus they are able to lead the hundren streams.

Therefore, to rise above people,

One must, in speaking, stay below them.

To remain in front of people,

One must put onself behind them.

Therefore Evolved Individuals remain above,

And yet the people are not weighted down.

They remain in front,

And the people are not held back.

Therefore the world willingly elects them,

And yet it does not reject them.

Because they do not compete,

The world cannot compete with them.

A true leader walks with his people. Be no greater than the poorest person and they will respect you.

How could the rivers and the seas

Become like kings to valleys?

Because of skill in lowliness

They have become the valley's lords.

So
then to be above the folk,

You speak as if you were beneath;

And if you wish to be out front,

Then act as if you were behind.

The
Wise Man so is up above

But is no burden to the folk;

His station is ahead of them

To see they do not come to harm.

The
world will gladly help along

The Wise Man and will bear no grudge.

Since he contends not for his own

The world will not contend with him.

The rivers and seas can become the masters of many streams just because they skillfully stay in lower valleys.

So they can be the leaders of many streams.

Therefore (he) who wants to rule over the people should show his modesty by his words.

He who wants to lead the people should place himself behind them.

In this way, the sage is above the people, but the people do not feel him as a burden.

He is in front of the people (leading them), but the people do not feel him as a hindrance.

Therefore all the people under Heaven revere him and do not tire of him.

Just because he does not compete with others,

Nobody under Heaven can compete with him.

The reason the river and the sea are able to be kings of all the river valleys is that they are good at keeping below them.

Thus they are able to be kings of all the river valleys.

This is why, if one wishes to be above the common folk, he must use his words to place himself below them.

If one wishes to be at the front of the common folk, he must use his person in such a way that they think of him as behind them.

Therefore the sage positions himself above, yet the common folk do not regard him as heavy;

he positions himself in front, yet the common folk do not regard him as an obstacle.

Therefore all under Heaven happily promote him without ever tiring of it.

It is because he does not contend that none among all under Heaven can contend with him.

1. The reason why rivers and oceans are able to be the kings of the one hundred
valleys is that they are good at being below them.

2. for this reason they are able to be the kings of the one hundred valleys.

3.
Therefore in the Sage's desire to be above the people,

4. He must in his speech be below them.

5. And in his desire to be at the front of the people,

6. He must in his person be behind them.

7. Thus he dwells above, yet the people do not regard him as heavey;

8. And he dwells in front, yet the people do not see him as posing a threat.

9. The whole world delights in his praise and never tires of him.

10. Is it not because he is not contentious,

11. That, as a result, no one in the world can contend with him?!

An ocean is
greater

than the hundred rivers

that flow into it,

and all it does is wait

to receive what they bring.

If you want
to teach people,

don't talk down to them.

If you want to lead them,

find out where they want to go.

People love
leaders

who make them feel safe

without smothering them.

They'll always support

a leader like that,

and because he doesn't try

to compete with anybody,

nobody is able to compete with him.

.

Leading from Behind

Great rivers and seas are lords of all mountain streams,

because they are good at staying below them.

Therefore they are lords of the streams.

Thus the wise in watching over the people

speak humbly from below the people,

and in leading the people get behind them.

In this way the wise watch over the people

but do not oppress them;

they lead the people but do not block them.

Thus everyone happily goes along without getting tired.

Because they do not compete,

the world cannot compete with them.

The reason why streams and seas rule over rivers and brooks is that they are taking a low position.

Thus they remain lords of abundance.

Likewise the Sage:

He becomes a model for others by keeping in the background.

He leads them upward by keeping glow.

Thus he accomplishes outstanding things without being prominent and produces harmony without causing injury.

Because he does not oppress anybody everybody presses on to him because he is untiring one does not tire of him.

And because he is a master of non-action devoted to all nobody can harm him.

The Lord of Waters

Lao Tze says,

That the reason whereby the rivers and sea can be the lord of a hundred streams is because they know to afford a low level, thus they can be the lord of hundreds of streams.

Hence the sage who intends to lead the people from above has to speak humbly to the people.

He who intends to walk ahead to guide the people has to seek his own benefit after seeking the people's.

In this way,

although he has placed himself above the people, the people do not feel his weight,

and though he has his place before the people, the people will not feel it is an injury to them.

Therefore,

all in the world are glad to enthrone him to be the lord, and do not weary of him.

Because he does not strive, no one finds it possible to strive with him.

LEADING FROM BEHIND

The
sea is the ruler of river and stream,

because it rules from well beneath.

The
teacher guides his students best,

by allowing them to lead.

When
the ruler is a sage,

the people do not feel oppressed;

they support the one who rules them well,

and never tire of him.

He
who is non-competitive

invites no competition.

All streams flow to the sea

because it is lower than they are.

Humility gives it its power.

If you want to govern the people,

you must place yourself below them.

If you want to lead the people,

you must learn how to follow them.

The Master is above the people,

and no one feels oppressed.

She goes ahead of the people,

and no one feels manipulated.

The whole world is grateful to her.

Because she competes with no one,

no one can compete with her.

Oceans and rivers can be the destinations of a hundred waters because the former place themselves just lower than the latter, thus they can be the destinations of a hundred waters.

Hence if one wishes to be on top of others he must place himself lower than others;

If he wishes to lead others he must put his own interest behind others.

Hence, when a Sage ruler was on top of others, yet, they did not feel pressure;

when he was in front of others, still, they did not feel hurt.

And the whole world was glad to have him on top, and did not weary of him.

Because of non-struggle, therefore, there is nothing under heaven which can struggle with him.

The reason why rivers and seas have the capacity for kingship over all the valleys is that they excel in lowliness.

That is why they have the capacity for kingship over all valleys.

Thus, since the sage wants to elevate the people, his speech is down to earth.

Since the sage wants to advance the people, he positions himself at the back,

So that when he is at the front, people do not harm him.

When he stands above, people do not feel pressure.

The whole world supports him untiringly.

Since he does not rely on competition, the world has nothing with which to compete.

LXVI

A
river makes a valley lush and fertile because it's content to settle to the
lowest place

All things can draw what they need from it, without drowning in it

To be a leader, then, you must sink and be still

And let the people gather around you

You must follow the contours of people's hearts

And spill into their lives as little as possible

When you are quiet, the people will not see you as a weight on their shoulders

When you keep to your banks, the people will not be threatened by you

There will be no reason to build dykes or damns to limit your power

And the people will delight in your presence

Rivers and Seas Are Lords of the Hundred Va
lleys

The reason why rivers and seas

Can be lords of the hundred valleys

is that they lower themselves to them well;

therefore they can be lords

of the hundred valleys.

So when sages wish to rise above people,

they lower themselves to them in their speech.

When they want to precede people,

they go after them in status.

So when sages rule,

people dorft take it gravely.

And when sages are in the forefront,

people don't attack them.

Therefore the world happily backs them

and does not tire of them.

Because they do not contend,

no one in the world can contend with them.

The river and the sea can be the king of hundreds of valleys, because they are adept to place themselves low.

This is why they can be the kings of hundreds of valleys.

Therefore sages speak humbly in order to win people.

They put people before themselves in order to lead people.

This is why when sages are the superior, people do not feel oppressed.

When sages are leading, people would not be hurt.

Consequently, when world is happy to support them and is never tired.

Since the sage does not contend with anybody, nobody can compete with one.

How do the river and the sea become the king of all streams?

Because they place themselves in low positions, they are the kings of all streams.

Therefore, to reign over the people, one must use humble words.

To wish to stand in front of the people, one must put oneself in back of them.

Therefore the sage is above the people, and they do not feel the heaviness of his weight; he stands in front of them, they do not feel hurt.

Therefore all the world is glad to adore him without getting tired of him.

Just because he contends with nobody, nobody contends with him.

Why is the sea, king of all streams?

Because it lies below them.

Therefore, the king of all streams.

Thus, want to be above others, must lay low.

Want to lead others, must follow behind.

In this way,when the sage rules,

people will not feel oppressed.

When he leads,

they will not be harmed.

The whole world support him, not tire of him.

He does not compete;

the others cannot compete with him.

How did the sea

gain kingship of a hundred streams?

Because it takes the lower position.

Hence, it is king of a hundred streams.

Therefore,
when True Persons are over the people

they put themselves below the people by their speech.

When they lead the people

they stand behind the people.

When
True Persons are given places above the people

they do not crush the people with their weight.

When they take their place ahead of the people

they do not obstruct the people's progress.

That is why everything under heaven supports them gladly

and does not tire of them.

Because
they strive with no one,

no one can ever strive with them.

Why
are oceans greater than creeks and rivers and lakes?

Because they lay lower than the rest

because gravity carries the high to the low

because they are the lowest they are the greatest.

Wise one

to speak to people you must be lower than them,

to lead people you must be behind them,

to be first you must be last,

so that people will listen without feeling alienated ,

so that people will follow without feeling like sheep,

so that your quality can shine without contention.

This
way the whole earth will feel your push

and not be bothered with the direction.

Without pushing

and
without pushing

no one pulls back.

How did the great rivers and seas become the kings of the ravines? By being
experts at keeping low.

Therefore to be above the people you have to speak as though you're lower than
the people in some ways.

So to be ahead of the people, you have to follow them in your own person. To
be foremost or guide well, walk behind.

The
wise man keeps himself on top, and the people hardly feels his weight or get
crushed by it in time. He guides in this way, and the people don't harm him
the least.

He can even walk in front [as an example], and people don't wish him harm. [Let's
hope that.]

In this dynamic [guru] way everything under heaven will be glad to be pushed
by him and will not find his guidance irksome. Then the people of the world
are glad, the world rejoices and praises him without getting tired of it, in
order to uphold him forever.

He
accomplishes his aims by overt non-striving. Because he doesn't compete in the
open, no one can compete well with him.

The river and sea can be kings of the hundred valley streams because they are good at lying below them.

For this reason,

They can be kings of the hundred valley streams.

For this reason, too,

If the sage wants to be above the people,

in his words, he must put himself below them;

If he wishes to be before the people,

in his person, he must stand behind them.

Therefore,

He is situated in front of the people,

but they are not offended;

He is situated above the people,

but they do not consider him a burden.

All under heaven happily push him forward without wearying.

Is this not because he is without contention?

Therefore,

No one under heaven can contend with him.

That by which the great rivers and seas receive the tribute of all the streams, is the fact of their being lowly; that is the cause of their superiority.

Thus the Sage, wishing to govern the people, speaks of himself as beneath them; and wishing to lead them, places himself behind them.

So, while he is yet above them, they do not feel his weight; and being before them, he yet causes no obstruction.

Therefore all men exalt him with acclamation, and none is offended.

And because he does not strive, no man is his enemy.

A Field of Dreams

You do not exist to fulfill each other's dreams,

but to show each other the place

where these hopes are born.

Do not impose your dreams upon each other.

You must each follow the images

that arise within your own hearts.

But you can create for each other an open field

where dreams can grow and flourish.

Do not try to ''tweak" or modify

the dreams of your beloved.

These are deeply personal

and must be treated with great respect.

Giving help and encouragement to each other

in the following of dreams

is good and proper.

But the dreams themselves are sacred

and must be given great respect.

The great rivers and seas are kings of all mountains streams Because
they skillfully stay below them. That is why they can be their kings.

Therefore, in order to be the superior of the people, One must, in the
use of words, place himself below them. And in order to be ahead of the
people, One must, in one's own person, follow them.

Therefore the sage rejoices in praising him without getting tired of it.

It is precisely because he does not compete that the world cannot compete with him.

Why are rivers
and seas lords of the waters?

Because they afford the common level

And so become lords of the waters.

The common people love a sound man

Because he does not talk above their level,

Because, though he lead them,

He follows them,

He imposes no weight on them;

And they in turn, because he does not impede them,

Yield to him, content:

People never tire of anyone

Who is not bent upon comparison.

The great rivers and oceans can hold the water of all the streams.

Because they are lower, the water flows to them.

Therefore, if you want to be the head of the people, you must first humble yourself;

If you want to lead the people, you must first put yourself behind.

This is why the great men were above the people, but the people did not feel burdened;

They were in front of the people, but the people did not feel harmed.

So, the people were happy to make the great men their leaders, and did not feel tired of them.

Only because the great men did not fight, was there no one who could compete with them.

The reason the sea is king of a hundred streams is because it lies below them.

Therefore, it is called king of a hundred streams.

When the sage wants to guide the people, in speech he always lies below them.

When the sage wants to lead the people, in deed he always follows behind them.

Thus,

even though he is above them, the people do not feel oppressed.

Even though he is ahead of them, the people do not feel obstructed.

Therefore, the people willingly and joyously put him in a leadership position.

Because he is above contention, the people never contend with him.

The ocean can be the king of all deep places

Because it positions itself lowest in the world.

Similarly, the one who wants to be influential

Must first be humble in his speech and actions.

The one who wants to be the leader

Must first go back behind all others.

When such a leader is above, people will feel no weight.

When such a leader is in front, people will feel no hindrance.

He/She is therefore recommended without reservation,

For one who fights for nothing advances best.

The great rivers and streams all pour their tribute of the world onto the seas.

The seas gain this tribute and are called high and mighty because they lie low, humility gives the sea its power.

It is for this reason that the followers of Tao humble themselves before mankind.

They speak in tones of humility and lowborn status.

They do not attempt to lead, but learn to follow, and find themselves leading the people from behind.

In this way the wise sovereign will rule over the people, but they will not feel his weight.

He will lead the people, but they will not feel slighted or displeased.

The people will gladly uphold and support such a one as this.

The master does not strive, in this way no one can strive against him.

