===== Chapter 26 =====

Heaviness acts as the foundation to lightness.

Stillness acts as a sovereign to restlessness.

Therefore, sovereign masters travel all day

And do not depart from [their] "light" heaviness:

Even though there are luxurious sights, comforts, and places—

They rightly rise above [such things].

How does the lord of ten thousand chariots endure

And yet consider himself to be unimportant in the world?

Frivolous laws lose [one's] foundation.

Rash laws lose [one's] sovereignty.

Gravity is the root of lightness, Stillness the master of passion.

The Sage travels all day But does not leave the baggage-cart; When surrounded by magnificent scenery Remains calm and still.

When a lord of ten thousand chariots Behaves lightly in this world,

Lightness loses its root, Passion loses its master.

Being solid is the foundation of lightness.

Being calm is the ruler of haste.

Thus, the sage, when traveling all day,

Never parts with his luggage.

Seeing beautiful sights,

He remains unconcerned and calm.

Will the ruler of the myriad chariots

Let himself be frivolous?

If he's frivolous he will lose his foundations.

If he's rash he will lose rulership.

HEAVY AND LIGHT CHARACTER

As heaviness of character, honesty and generosity

Are the root of lightness, frivolity and quick wit.

So motion and activity spring from

Serenity, tranquility and quietude.

Thus the Sage:

Even while traveling and moving about all day,

Never loses his poise,

Departs, not from his true nature.

Tho' presented with magnificence, beauty,

grace, glory, honor, splendor, and comfort,

He remains calm, leisurely,

quiet and dispassionate.

The leader with great responsibility,

Conducting himself with frivolity,

Imperils himself, and he will fail.

Exercising hasty restless action,

He will lose mastery over himself.

Being solid creates a lighthearted foundation.

Unresponsive stillness makes an agitated master.

The sages all day go forward and do not separate themselves from their heavy load.

Though they have beautiful perception, they stay calm in an undisturbed manner.

Their resources are what a master of ten-thousand chariots has, yet they are a person who moves lightly in Heaven below (the sacred body).

Disregard follows the loss of their foundation.

Restlessness follows the loss of this master.

THE NATURE OF MASS

Mass is the fulcrum of mobility; stillness is the father of motion.

Therefore
the sage King, though he travel afar, remaineth near his

supplies. Though opportunity tempt him, he remaineth quietly in proper

disposition, indifferent. Should the master of an host of chariots bear

himself frivolously? If he attack without support, he loseth his base;

if he become a raider, he forfeiteth his throne.

Serenity is wiser than superficiality, dignity is master of turbulence.The sage does not step off the path of serenity. He is not distracted byunruly passions, angered in contemplation nothing can perturb him. Woe,if the ruler of the land considers himself more important than the realm.His follower loses, who succumbs to frivolity, His dominance loses, whois driven by passions.

Heavy is the source of that which is light

The unmoved mover is the origin of all movement

Therefore a true human being can be in motion all day

Not because it is him moving himself

But because he just floats on life

Like a spectator he enjoys the wonderful and sparkling creation

Why should he, as the centre of the world,

Consider himself minor to that world?

One who knows his grandeur, comes loose of the world

One who wanders restlessly in that world, has lost oneself

Saneness or sobriety is more basic than frivolity. Calmness or self-sufficiency is superior to being agitated.

Therefore the intelligent man, though he goes on a long journey, will never depart far from his means of conveyance. No matter how exciting the distractions, he never submits to their lures.

What would happen if Nature were to act frivolously?

If it became frivolous, it would be deprived of its sanity. If it became agitated, it would lose control of itself.

As the heavy must be the foundation of the light,

So quietness is lord and master of activity.

Truly, "A man of consequence though he travels all day

Will not let himself be separated from his baggage-wagon,

However magnificent the view, he sits quiet and dispassionate".

How much less, then, must be the lord of ten thousand chariots

Allow himself to be lighter than these he rules!

If he is light, the foundation is lost;

If he is active, the lord and master is lost.

Gravity is the ground of lightness.

Stillness is the master of unrest.

The sage can travel all day,

yet never wander far from the baggage wagon.

Though splendor and spectacle may beckon,

he remains unmoved, indifferent.

Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly?

One who acts lightly is not grounded.

One who is restless is not his own master.

The heavy serves as root to the light

Stillness serves as master to haste

And so it is that a noble one journeys all day

Without leaving the heavy supply wagon,

Although there are splendid vistas,

Calmly staying above it all

So how could the lord of a myriad chariots

Also conduct a frivolous life under heaven?

To be frivolous, would then be to lose the root

To be hasty would then be to lose the mastery

Calm

The heavy is the root of the light;

Tranquility is the master of agitation.

Therefore the gentleman, traveling all day,

does not lose sight of his luggage carts,

Though there are beautiful things to be seen.

When he is safely inside a walled-in tavern

Only then does he trancends all concern.

How can the lord of ten thousand chariots

Treat his own person more lightly than the whole land?

If you regard the things too lightly

Then you lose your roots.

If you are restless, you lose your control.

Heaviness is the root of lightness. Tranquility is the master of agitation.

This is why the sage travels all day without ever losing sight of her baggage. She may live in a glorious palace, but she isn't attached to its pleasures.

Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots behave lightly in the world?

One who acts lightly loses her foundation. One who becomes agitated sacrifices her mastery.

True darkness seems to be light;

Indeed, it is the origin of light.

The enduring tranquility

May appear to be agitated:

For it is the apogee of agitation.

Thus wandering all the livelong day,

The student of the Sage

Stays as still as can be-

Unmoved by the attraction of glory,

Or the titillation of diversion.

Even stopping amid the feast,

His independence is unshakeable.

Could this be said of the political insider,

Who so lightly drops his dignity

For every passing pleasure?

Airy lightness lacks foundation;

Fitful action loses the center.

One in contact with his inner truth is able to abide in darkness, as still as a moonless night, and yet remain in motion. For he understands that movement which comes from the clear and centered point of inner balance is often seen as stillness, and that his most pure and silent state of rest may appear to be a whirlwind of activity. The former state is often seen in the creative artist; the latter, in the athlete. But he is not concerned with appearances or with the perceptions of others, for he is content in his own self-awareness. If there is pleasure to be had, he takes it gratefully and without selling his dignity for its superficial luster. For he knows that should he allow his inner independence to be purchased for a favor or a privilege, then he will have sacrificed the central and stable point of his connection to the Cosmic Whole.

Heaviness (sincerity)

is the root of lightness (frivolity).

And serenity far surpasses hastiness.

The
truly wise can travel all day

yet never put down their baggage

(a pun alluding to depth or heaviness of spirit).

Though there be appealing distractions

they remain serene, passive, undisturbed.

How
can a leader of ten thousand chariots

make his rule obscure, insignificant?

To
be light is to lose the root of lightness;

to be hasty is to lose self-mastery.

Lightness has its roots in heaviness. Restlessness has a master in stillness. Therefore, the Holy Man travels all day without leaving the baggage wagon. Surrounded by sensuous enjoyments he remains peaceful and free.

How, then, can the Lord of ten thousand chariots regard his personality as of less importance than his royal trust? By levity he will lose his ministers; by restlessness he will lose his throne.

Heaviness is the basis of lightness; Calmness is the controlling power of hastiness.

Therefore the Sage, though traveling all day long, Never separates from his baggage-wagon; Though surrounded with magnificent sights, He lives in tranquillity.

How is it, then, that a king of ten thousand chariots Should conduct himself so lightly in the empire?

To be light is to lose the basis; To be hasty is to lose the controlling power.

Ambiguous Reversals

Deem 'heavy' as root of 'light'

Deem 'calm' as lord of 'uproar'.

Using this: Sages pass the whole day in activity

and never separate from his heavy provisions cart.

Even though he has an sublime views,

surpassing those where swallows dwell.

What do we say, then,

of the 10,000 chariot ruler

who, based on the self, 'lights' the social world?

To 'light' is to lose the root.

To 'uproar' is to lose the lord.

The weighty is the origin of the weightless.

Stillness is the fountain of restlessness.

Therefore, the ruler journeys from morning until night and never separates himself from his heavy supply cart.

Although he is in a glorious atmosphere, he remains quiescent and above it.

How can a leader "with ten thousand chariots" take himself lightly before the world?

To take himself lightly is to lose the origin.

Restlessness means that the fountain is lost.

The heavy is the root of the light.

Stillness is the sovereign of restless movement.

Therefore a virtuous man will not lose sight of his impedimenta during the whole day.

Although he has splendour, he stands aloof.

Unfortunately the great ruler of ten thousand chariots governs the country indiscreetly.

To act abruptly is to lose the trust of his officials.

To act restlessly is to lose his respect as a sovereign.

Heaviness is the root of lightness;

Stillness is the sovereign of restlessness.

Hence, the gentleman journeyed all day

Without leaving his luggage vans.

Though having imperial guards,

In leisure, he was as clear as day.

How could a ten-thousand-chariot king

Conduct himself lightly over all under heaven?

Light, he would lose his root;

Restless, he would lose his sovereignty.

Heaviness is the basis of lightness,

The passing is the basis of movement,

Therefore the sage, even when traveling all day long,

Never abandons the baggage wagon,

Therefore the sage, even when surrounded by splendor and luxury,

Is shrouded in indifference that stems from serenity.

How can this great emperor, with a thousand chariots,

Move easily throughout his kingdom?

If he is light, he will lose his basis,

If he is hasty, he will lose his serenity.

Wang-Pi comments:

The light cannot bear the heavy; the small cannot contain the large; the sedentary controls the moving, the one who does not move from his place controls the one who moves from his place.

Therefore heaviness is the basis of lightness, and serenity is the secret of control.

The heavy is the root of the light;

The still is the lord of the restless.

Therefore
the gentleman when travelling all day

Never lets the heavily laden carts out of his sight.

It is only when he is safely behind walls and watch-towers

That he rests peacefully and is above worries.

How, then, should a ruler of ten thousand chariots

Make light of his own person in the eyes of the empire?

If
light, then the root is lost;

If restless, then the lord is lost.

The Virtue of Gravity

The heavy is of the light the root, and rest is motion's master.

Therefore the holy man in his daily walk does not depart from gravity. Although he may have magnificent sights, he calmly sits with liberated mind.

But how is it when the master of the ten thousand chariots in his personal conduct is too light for the empire? If he is too light he will lose his vassals. If he is too passionate he will lose the throne.

Something can only be heavy relative to something lighter. Movement can only occur relative to something unmoved. The master may travel all day, but remains motionless. There may be amazing sights, but he never looks. A father shouldn't act the fool, and ignore the needs of his family. If you take your responsibilities lightly, you lose the basis of your being. If you fall prey to restlessness you cannot be relaxed.

Earnestness is the foundation of frivolity;

serenity is in control of rashness.

Thus, a gentleman, in the course of a day, does not depart from serenity and earnestness.

He refrains from extravagance [in public] and lives plainly at home.

Why would the sovereign of a ten-thousand-carriage state govern the world with frivolity?

Frivolity loses foundation; rashness loses control.

Heavy is the root of light,

and tranquil the ruler of reckless.

A sage traveling all day is never far from the supplies in his cart, and however spectacular the views he remains calm and composed.

How can a lord having ten thousand chariots act lightly in governing all beneath heaven?

Act lightly and you lose your source-root.

Act recklessly and you lose your rule.

Heavy objects provide footing for the lighter ones,

Calm disposition exerts control over restlessness.

The wise ruler travels all day without leaving his heavy supplies.

Even at the magnificent sights, he remain relaxed and unperturbed.

Why than the lord of ten thousand chariots appear light-headed in public?

Being light-headed reflects the loss of footing,

Being restless signifies the loss of control.

Heaviness
acts as root of lightness

Stillness acts as sovereign of agitation.

Appropriately
it happens

That sages travel throughout the day

Without departing from heavy or light

Even though fabulous views are present

They dwell in great comfort and go about like this.

How would one be lord of 10000 war-chariots

Yet have a body which is light in the world?

Following
lightness comes loss of the root

Following agitation comes loss of the sovereign.

The heavy is the base (root) of the light. Stillness is the prince of movement. (These things should be always united in a just temperament).

Therefore a wise prince, when he travels (in his light carriage), never separates himself from the heavy wagons which carry his baggage. However beautiful the landscape through which he passes, he takes care to lodge only in peaceful places.

Alas, how could an emperor behave so foolishly,

losing all authority by dint of frivolity, and all the rest through his waywardness?

Heaviness is the root of lightness.

Quietness is the master of restlessness

Therefore the sage travels the entire day

Without leaving the heavy supplies

Even though there are luxurious sights

He is composed and transcends beyond

How can the lord of ten thousand chariots

Applies himself lightly to the world?

To be light is to lose one's root

To be restless is to lose one's mastery

Heaviness, or gravitas, lies at the root of human affairs. Lightness, or gaiety, dances carelessly above them. Those who are quiet, unmoved, deliberate and composed possess power over those who are noisy, restless, impulsive and impatient.

Therefore, the sage traverses the Tao an entire day without ever losing track of the essentials of life. Even though there are many colorful sights of luxuries along the way, the sage recognizes them as illusory, and so remains perfectly composed and unmoved, transcending beyond the temptation.

How, then, can the king, who rules the force of ten thousand war chariots, treat lightly the serious task of governing the kingdom?

To be "light," in this context, is to be disconnected from the important foundation of life. In a similar way, being restless or unstable is to lose one's power of mastery - the power of the true self!

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF DIGNITY

The heavy is the root of the light; the quiet is master of motion. Therefore the wise man in all the experience of the day will not depart from dignity. Though he be surrounded with sights that are magnificent, he will remain calm and unconcerned.

How does it come to pass that the Emperor, master of ten thousand chariots, has lost the mastery of the Empire? Because being flippant himself, he has lost the respect of his subjects; being passionate himself, he has lost the control of the Empire.

The heavy (chung) is root (ken) to the light (ch'ing);

The tranquil (ching) is master (chün) to the agitated (tsao).

Therefore the sage travels all day,

Without leaving (li) his baggage wagon (tzu chung).

Although he has glorious palaces (yung kuan),

He avoids its sumptuous apartments (yen-ch'u).

How could the Lord of ten thousand chariots,

Conduct himself lightly in the world?

One who acts lightly loses his foundation (pen);

One who is agitated loses his master (chün).

Heaviness (sincerity) is the root of lightness (frivolity). And serenity far surpasses hastiness.

The truly wise can travel all day yet never put down their baggage. Though there be appealing distractions they remain serene, passive, undisturbed.

How can a leader of ten thousand chariots make his role obscure, insignificant?

To be light is to lose the root of lightness; to be hasty is to lose self-mastery.

Heavy is the foundation of light.

Stillness is the source of movement.

Thus, the Tao–Master travels all day

without losing sight of the baggage–cart.

He is not swept away by splendid scenery.

He remains quiet and unperturbed.

Why should the lord of the land allow himself to be swept away?

Allow yourself to be swept away, and you lose your foundation.

Allow yourself to be moved, and you lose self–mastery.

Twenty-six

The heavy is the root of the light.

The still is the master of unrest.

Therefore the sage, traveling all day,

Does not lose sight of his baggage.

Though there are beautiful things to be seen,

He remains unattached and calm.

Why
should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly in public?

To be light is to lose one's root.

To be restless is to lose one's control.

Heaviness is the root of lightness.

Tranquillity is the lord of movement.

That is why the sage is always accompanied by his heavily laden cart

When he travels all day long.

Though he has a luxurious life to enjoy,

He never indulges himself in it.

Why should a ruler of ten thousand chariots

Take reckless action to govern the empire?

Lightness leads to the loss of the root;

Restlessness leads to the loss of the lord.

The heavy is the root of the light;

Stillness is the lord of bustle.

Therefore the prince,

Traveling all day,

Never parts with his baggage-wagon.

Even at a magnificent sight,

He remains at ease, unmoved.

How could the lord of ten thousand chariots

Regard his own body more lightly than all under Heaven?

If you act lightly, the root is lost;

If you bustle, the lord is lost.

Frivolity should be anchored to solemnity.

Tranquillity should keep a tight rein on agitation.

Therefore, the sage carries out his daily tasks with gravity and equanimity.

He is oblivious to the honour that has been bestowed upon him.

Although he lives in luxury, he is unaffected by all the trappings.

How could any national leader behave in a cavalier fashion in governing the country?

In fickle frivolity, he will lose the foundations.

In great haste, he will lose control.

Gravity as a Virtue

Chung Teh

Heaviness is the root of lightness;

Quiescence is the master of hastiness.

Thus the Sage traveling all day

Will not stay away from his loaded cart.

Though glorious prospects are in view,

He remains serene in a transcendental atmosphere.

For what reason should it be

That a weighty person like the lord of ten thousand chariots

Would consider himself lighter than worldly vanities?

In making light of himself, he loses his ministers;

In being hasty, he loses his kingly command.

At the root of lightness must be weightiness;

The master of activity is stillness.

Therefore a nobleman, though he travelled all day long,

would not allow himself to be separated from the waggon

bearing his luggage.

And however splendid were the sights surrounding him,

He would rest content in quiet solitude.

How much less should a king, with his myriad chariots,

Allow himself to be lightly swayed?

Through light behaviour he would lose his roots;

Through restlessness he would lose control.

The solid is the root of the light,

The still is the master of the restless.

Therefore,

The sage travels all day

But never leaves the baggage wagon.

Though there are arresting sights,

He does not stir but sits.

Why does the master of ten thousand chariots

Act lightly to all beneath heaven?

Lightness will uproot him,

Restlessness unman him.

Centeredness is the cure for impulsiveness.

Serenity is the master of restlessness.

Knowing this, one of universal nature is placid and never departs from the center of his own being.

Though he may move about all day,

he never loses his poise.

Though he may be surrounded by splendor and comfort,

he is always dispassionate and undistracted.

For one with great responsibility,

to conduct himself lightly is perilous.

In frivolity, one's root is lost.

In restlessness, one's self-mastery could go with the wind!

XXVI.

Virtue
of Gravity

Weight
is the root of lightness, stillness the master of motion,

And
the daily way of the sage departs not from his base,

Although
he have brilliant prospects, he is unconcerned and quiet,

Should
the lord of ten thousand chariots be too light for his place?

Then
he will lose not supporters alone,

But,
being too restless, loses his throne.

Gravity is the root of lightness,

Quiescence is the master of motion.

That is why a king's son though he may travel all day long, does not cease to be quiet and grave; though he may achieve glory he abides in restfulness, he affirms his detachment.

How sad it would be if the Lord of a thousand chariots should conduct himself lightly in the kingdom!

If his conduct is light, he will fail as a Minister;

If he is hasty in action, he will fail as a Ruler.

Heaviness
is

the
root of lightness.

Peace
of mind is

the
master of restlessness.

The
Complete Thinker,

traveling
all day,

Does
not leave

the
baggage-wagon;

There
may be

gorgeous
sights to see,

But
stays

peacefully
at home.

How
can a leader

Have
a light hearted position in the world?

To
be light hearted

is
to be separated from one's root;

To
be restless

is
to lose one's self-mastery.

Gravity is the root of lightness; stillness the master of agitation.

Thus a nobleman travels all day without leaving his baggage-wagon. Though he may have a camp and watch-towers (around him), he sits quietly and undisturbed.

How should then a lord of ten thousand chariots conduct himself lightly in regard to All-under-heaven?

If he conducts himself lightly, he will lose the mastery.

Gravity is the root of lightness; stillness, the ruler of

movement.

Therefore
a wise prince, marching the whole day, does not go far

from his baggage waggons. Although he may have brilliant prospects to

look at, he quietly remains (in his proper place), indifferent to

them. How should the lord of a myriad chariots carry himself lightly

before the kingdom? If he do act lightly, he has lost his root (of

gravity); if he proceed to active movement, he will lose his throne.

Dark is the root of Light. Calm is the ruler of motion.

For
these reasons,
The
Super-Ego may travel the whole world
without leaving their own vehicle behind;

though inside a walled courtyard of a busy inn,
one may placidly rise
above it all.
How,
then, should a King with ten-thousand chariots
take themself lightly before
Heaven?
If
a King takes themself lightly,
they lose their taproot;
if they are
hasty, they will lose their Kingship.

The
naked center doesn't change

Its quietude is absolute

Yet from it spring all things that move

This bare awareness is the root

Can
you go about all day

And never leave your true abode

No matter how enticing are

The splendors of the road?

Don't
think that you can run around

And act a perfect fool

Just see that you are at the eye

Of nature's whirlpool

HEAVINESS is the root of lightness.

Serenity is the master of restlessness.

Therefore, the Sage, travelling all day,

Does not part with the baggage-wagon;

Though there may be gorgeous sights to see,

He stays at ease in his own home.

Why should a lord of ten thousand chariots

Display his lightness to the world?

To be light is to be separated from one's root;

To be restless is to lose one's self-mastery.

The heavy is the root of the light.

Composure is the ruler of instability.

An experienced traveler will journey all day, watching over his belongings;

Though there may be spectacles to see

He easily passes them by.

However splendid the views,

he stays serenely in himself.

Why should the lord of the country

flit about like a fool?

If he is unstable, he will lose his rulership.

Rather than glitter like jade

He must stand like common stone.

Heaviness is the basis of lightness.

Stillness is the standard of activity.

Thus
the Master travels all day

without ever leaving her wagon.

Even though she has much to see,

she is at peace in her indifference.

Why
should the lord of a thousand chariots

be amused at the foolishness of the world?

If you abandon yourself to foolishness,

you lose touch with your beginnings.

If you let yourself become distracted,

you will lose the basis of your power.

The leader who is centered and grounded can work with erratic people and critical group situations without harm.

Being centered means having the ability to recover one's balance, even in the midst of action. A centered person is not subject to passing whims or sudden excitements.

Being grounded means being down-to-earth, having gravity or weight. I know where I stand, and I know what I stand for: that is ground.

The centered and grounded leader has stability and a sense of self.

One who is not stable can easily get carried away by the intensity of leadership and make mistakes of judgement or even become ill.

Heaviness is the root of lightness.

Stillness is the master of restlessness.

Therefore, the Sage walks All day

and never parts from the baggage wagon.

Although there are many beautifu palaces to behold,

He is beyond such things and is at peace. Why should the ruler of 10,000

chariots

Act with such frivolity in this world?

To act lightly is to lose one's root.

To be restless is to lose one's self control.

Infinity
is the source of all physical

manifestations.

The Infinite stillness is the creator of the

churning

universe.

The
sage travels all day over the land and sea

but does not lose sight of Infinity.

Though the manifestations of the earth are

wondrous and beautiful,

she remains indifferent because she remains

centered

in the Infinite oneness.

The
leader of multitudes cannot afford to

lose her perspective.

Indulging
in the physical manifestations

results in a loss of focus on the

Infinite.

To be caught up in distinguishing things,

narrows the leader's perspective

to that of her followers.

Heavy is the root of light.

Stillness is the master of impatience.

Thus the wise man travels all day, but does not leave his wagon.

Although there are glorious sights, he is relaxed and proper.

Why should the Lord of 10,000 chariots

conduct himself lightly under Heaven ?

Lightness leads to loss of roots.

Impatience leads to loss of control.

Seriousness is the basis of levity.

Stillness is the master of restlessness.

Therefore the sage, travelling all day,

Does not lose sight of his baggage-wagon.

Though there are magnificent sights to be seen, he remains calm and detached.

Why would it be that the ruler of ten thousand chariots would act lightly in public?

To be light-hearted is to lose one's foundation.

To be restless is to lose control.

Weight anchors lightness, and peace controls turmoil.

Thus, the wise person travels always with heavy provisions,

Is indifferent, like a swallow, to all the glory and grandeur.

What if a king treats the world lightly?

Being light, he will lose his root in the world.

Being changeable, he loses peace for the society.

Heaviness is the root of lightness Stillness is the master of agitation.

And so the Wise Person: Travels all day, not departing from the heavy baggage wagon although there are grand sights, he sits calmly aloof.

Why is this? A 10,000-chariot lord, mindful of his self takes the world lightly.

Light, then lose the Root agitated, then lose the mastery.

Hard work allows one to achieve easy life in future.

Yet we know also that the calm is the main thing in movement.

Therefore, the wise works hard all day long and does not avoid hard work. Nevertheless, he stays in the state of perfect calm.

He can even live in luxury and does not become deprived by it.

Why the owner of 10 000 chariots is haughty and disdains the entire world? Disdain destroys the soul!

And the absence of calm leads to the loss of the Base!...

That is light is above the heavy,

A calm mind is above an agitated one,

The Wise Person is freed from what is heavy and agitated,

In the middle of activities in the world he is at rest.

A
Leader doesn't act on impulse or without deep consideration,

The lack of deep thought hasn't a solid base,

Acting on impulse leads to loose control.

Heaviness
is the root of lightness. Tranquility is the ruler of agitation. For this reason,
the Sage travels all day without departing from his heavy-framed vehicle. Only
when there are encircling way stations does he reside at his ease in seclusion.

How
can a ruler of a myriad chariots treat himself with levity compared to the [things
of the] world?

If
one [abandons oneself to] levity then one loses one's roots, and if one becomes
agitated then one will lose one's autonomy.

Heaviness is the foundation of lightness.

Serenity is the lord of rashness.

Therefore the Sage who travels the whole day never leaves his heavily covered carts.

Though there are spectacles of splendor, he stays composed and aloof.

Why as a ruler of ten thousand chariots would he treat himself lightly in the world?

Lightness will lose the foundation.

Rashness will lose the lord.

The Gravity of Power

Gravity is the foundation of levity.

Stillness is the master of agitation.

Thus Evolved Individuals can travel the whole day

Without leaving behind their baggage.

However arresting the views,

They remain calm and unattached.

How can leaders with ten thousand chariots

Have a light-hearted position in the world?

If they are light-hearted, they lose their foundation.

If they are agitated, they lose their mastery.

Wander the land when you can. Take in the scent of flowers but stay serenely within yourself. Keep touch with your source by following your core.

The heavy is foundation for the light;

So quietness is master of the deed.

The
Wise Man, though he travel all the day,

Will not be separated from his goods.

So even if the scene is glorious to view,

He keeps his place, at peace, above it all.

For
how can one who rules

Ten thousand chariots

Give up to lighter moods

AS all the world may do?

If he is trivial,

His ministers are lost;

If he is strenuous,

There is no master then.

The heavy is the root of the light,

The tranquil is the master of the hasty,

Therefore the sage travels all day, without leaving his baggage wagon.

Although enjoying a magnificent and comfortable life, he does not indulge himself in it.

How is it that a lord of ten thousand chariots belittles his own importance under Heaven?

Lightness necessarily leads to the loss of Root,

Hastiness necessarily results in the loss of mastery.

The heavy is the foundation of the light, and quietude is the sovereign of activity.

This is why the sage travels throughout the day yet does not separate himself from his retinue.

So despite the presence of glorious scenery, he remains relaxed and detached.

How could one be the master of ten thousand war chariots and yet treat his own person lighter than all under Heaven!

If he treats it lighter, he will lose his foundation.

If he engages in activity, he will lose his sovereignty.

1. The heavy is the root of the light;

2. Tranquility is the loard of agitation.

3.
Therefore the gentleman, in traveling all day, does not get far away from his
luggage carts.

4. When he's safely inside a walled-in [protected] hostel and resting at ease—only
then does he transcend all concern.

5. How can the king of ten thousand chariots treat his own person more lightly
than the whole world?!

6.
If you regard things too lightly, then you lose the basic;

7. If you're agitated, you lose the "lord."

To be light
on your feet,

you need a steady mind.

If your body is active,

your mind should be relaxed.

A Master can
travel long distances

and still see all her possessions.

She may be surrounded by beauty

but she isn't caught up in it.

Why should a
Master scurry about thoughtlessly?

If you act lightly,

you lose your bearings.

If you act recklessly,

you lose your self-control.

.

Self-mastery

Gravity is the foundation of levity.

Serenity masters hastiness.

Therefore the wise travel all day

without leaving their baggage.

In the midst of honor and glory

they remain leisurely and calm,

How can a leader of a great country

behave lightheartedly and frivolously?

In frivolity, the foundation is lost.

In hasty action, self-mastery is lost.

The weighty guides the light-minded the stilled masters the restless.

Likewise the Sage:

He is anchored in his inner support and preserves his weight

He remains serene even when fame and wealth are calling.

For he who loses his inner support relying on things loses both weight and support.

Without weight he becomes light-minded and restless.

Without support he remains inferior and powerless.

Gravity and Serenity

Lao Tze says,

Gravity is the root of lightness.

Serenity is the ruler of hastiness.

Hence the sage practices the Tao all day long,

leaving no serene mind and heavy attitude.

Though a king can have seraglios and harems, he has to avoid approaching them.

Regretful are kings nowadays, they are very powerful, having ten thousand chariots and riders;

yet their attitude is light before the eyes of the people.

Light attitude will cause the loss of their subordinates;

hasty mind will cause the loss of their thrones.

CENTRING

The
natural way is the way of the sage,

serving as his dwelling,

providing his centre deep within,

whether in his home or journeying.

Even
when he travels far,

he is not separate

from his own true nature.

Maintaining awareness of natural beauty,

he still does not forget his purpose.

Although
he may dwell in a grand estate,

simplicity remains his guide,

for he is full aware, that losing it,

his roots as well would disappear.

So he is not restless,

lest he loses the natural way.

Similarly,
the people's leader

is not flippant in his role, nor restless,

for these could cause the loss

of the roots of leadership.

The heavy is the root of the light.

The unmoved is the source of all movement.

Thus the Master travels all day

without leaving home.

However splendid the views,

she stays serenely in herself.

Why should the lord of the country

flit about like a fool?

If you let yourself be blown to and fro,

you lose touch with your root.

If you let restlessness move you,

you lose touch with who you are.

Heaviness is the cause of lightness.

Serenity is the effect of restlessness.

Therefore, a commanding officer does not risk parting with his supply trains even for a single day journey.

Even though he had honors and respect from others, he stayed at ease and on high.

How could a ruler of "ten thousand chariots" (the King), take a risk lightly before the world?

To be light will then lose the effect.

The heavy is the root of the light.

Tranquility is the master of the restless.

Thus, the noble person will travel all day without leaving his seat.

Though the center of the highest authority,

And surrounded by luxury,

He remains clear-minded.

How could the king of myriad chariots treat his body with less care than he gives the country?

Being careless loses the foundation.

Being restless loses mastery.

XXVI

As
the heaviest part of anything must be at the bottom

So all activity must center on quietness

Only an idiot, while traveling, would wander away from his luggage

Until a safe and secure place is reached

So how can a leader treat a nation otherwise

Than as an extension of her own body?

Treat
people as unimportant and they will think the same of you

Leave them behind to pursue your own interests, and when you look again

They will not be there

Gravity Is the Root of Lightness

Gravity is the root of lightness;

calm is the master of excitement.

Thereby do exemplary people travel all day

without leaving their equipment.

Though they have a look of prosperity,

their resting place is transcendent.

What can be done about heads of state

who take the world lightly in their own selfinterest?

Lack of gravity loses servants of state;

instability loses heads of state.

Prudence is more stable than frivolity.

Rationality is superior to impatience.

Therefore, the sage always behaves prudently and rationally.

Even when successful, he is not carried away.

How could the king of a big kingdom rule without prudence?

Frivolity results in the loss of stability.

Impatience leads to the loss of superiority.

The heavy is the root of the light.

The still is the master of the active.

Therefore, the sage, travelling all day, never separates himself from the baggage-wagon.

Though there are splendid sights to see, he stays quiescently in his own place.

Why should a king of ten thousand chariots display his lightness to the world?

To be light is to be separated from one's root; to be active is not to be master.

The heavy roots (stabilizes) the light,

The still masters the jumpy.

Thus, the sage, traveling all days,

not lose sight of baggage.

Though there are beautiful things around,

he is unattracted and calm.

Why should the lord of a big country act lightly in public?

To be light is to lose one's root.

To be jumpy is to lose kingly dignity.

Whe solid must be the root of the light.

The still must be the master of thc restless.

Therefore,
wise people when traveling all day

do not lose sight of their baggage cart.

Although there are beautiful scenes to see,

they remain quietly in their own place.

Should a lord of ten thousand chariots

appear more frivolous than a simple traveler?

To
be light is to lose the root.

To be restless is to lose the master.

Gravity
is the basis for judging what is light.

Stasis is the basis for judging activity.

So it is that when wise people travel

they don't stray far from the vehicle.

Even though everything about may be breathtaking,

a wise one

sits

quietly

and peacefully.

Responsibility requires

focus and calm.

One
who takes oneself too lightly

loses touch

with the foundation

and ground of being.

One who becomes too active

loses touch

with reality.

The solid is the platform of the light, and the heavy is the root of the light.

(Maybe firm integrity has to be the basis of light frivolity).

Quiet strength rules over activity, the not-so-active could be the big boss
of the hasty.

So the wise man travels all day and never leaves his baggage;

he who travels all day hardly likes to be separated from his provision-chart:

However great and glorious the view, he sits quiet and dispassionate".

So the lord with ten thousand chariots can seldom allow himself to be light-spirited
and lighter than those he rules. The ruler of a great country should never make
light of his body - anywhere. In light frivolity, the controller's centre is
lost; in hasty action, such self-mastery. If the ruler is light-hearted, the
minister will be destroyed. If he is light, the foundation is lost;

If he is active, the lord is lost. [Maybe for ever.]

Heavy is the root of light;

Calm is the ruler of haste.

For these reasons,

The superior man may travel the whole day without leaving his heavy baggage cart.

Though inside the courtyard walls of a noisy inn,

he placidly rises above it all.

How then should a king with ten thousand chariots conduct himself lightly before all under heaven?

If he treats himself lightly,

he will lose the taproot;

If he is hasty,

he will lose the rulership.

Weight underlies lightness, quiescence underlies motion.

Therefore the Sage never loses his gravity and quiescence from day to day.

Though glorious palaces should belong to him, he would dwell in them peacefully, without attachment.

Alas that a king with many chariots should conduct himself with frivolity in the midst of his kingdom!

By levity he loses his ministers, and by inconstancy his throne.

Faithfulness

Restlessness causes the mind to wander.

You pace the floor wondering what next to do

to bring the passion back to your life.

You try this and that

but nothing satisfies.

Then the thought emerges,

"Perhaps a different person . . ."

Instead be still

and calm your fears.

Let the restlessness run its course

and fade.

When it passes, your beloved

will still be there

and your love will flame anew.

Faithfulness in a relationship

is not so much a product of willpower,

as of patience.

Patiently let the storms of your mind

blow past without uprooting you.

Your thoughts will always return to your beloved.

The heavy is the root of the light. The tranquil is the ruler of the hasty.

Therefore the sage travels all day Without leaving his baggage. Even
at the sight of magnificent scenes He remains leisurely and indifferent.

How is it that a lord with ten thousand chariots Should behave lightheartedly in his empire?

If he is lighthearted, the minister will be destroyed. If he is hasty, the ruler is lost.

Gravity is the
root of grace,

The mainstay of all speed.

A traveler of true means, whatever the day's pace,

Remembers the provision-van

And, however fine prospect be offered, is a man

With a calm head.

What lord of countless chariots would ride them in vain,

Would make himself fool of the realm,

With pace beyond rein,

Speed beyond helm?

Heaviness is the base of lightness,

Peace is the master of commotion.

Therefore, when the great men traveled,

They never let their carriages out of sight.

No matter how beautiful and entertaining the scenery was,

They acted as though they did not even see it.

How can the rulers of today behave more carelessly than anyone?

Lightness will cause the loss of the base,

Commotion will cause the loss of the master.

Heaviness is the center of lightness.

Stillness is the master of commotion.

For this reason,

The sage may travel the whole day,

Yet stays centered, without leaving his heavy baggage cart.

Or he may enjoy a splendid view,

Yet stays serene, calmly transcending all outward pleasures.

Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots behave lightly before all under Heaven?

One who behaves lightly loses one's center.

One who behaves agitatedly loses one's mastery.

Weight anchors lightness, and peace controls turmoil.

Thus, the wise person travels always with heavy provisions,

Is indifferent, like a swallow, to all the glory and grandeur.

What if a king treats the world lightly?

Being light, he will lose his root in the world.

Being changeable, he loses peace for the society.

The heavy is the root of the light.

Composure is the ruler of instability.

An experienced traveler will journey all day, watching over his belongings;

Though there may be spectacles to see

He easily passes them by.

However splendid the views,

he stays serenely in himself.

Why should the lord of the country

flit about like a fool?

If he is unstable, he will lose his rulership.

Rather than glitter like jade

He must stand like common stone.

