===== Chapter 47 =====

Without going out the door, know the world.

Without peaking out the windows, see the Celestial Tao.

The more distant one's going-out

The less one's knowledge is.

Therefore, the sages

Do not travel, and yet know

Do not see, and yet clearly understand

Do not "do," and yet complete [their work].

Without going out the door, Know the world. Without peeping through the
window, See heaven's Tao. The further you travel, The less you know.

This is why the Sage Knows without budging, Identifies without looking, Does without trying.

You don't need to step through the door

To know the whole world.

You don't need to look from the window

To see the way of heaven.

The farther you go, the less you know.

Thus the sage knows without traveling,

Understands without seeing,

Achieves without doing.

KNOWING

Everything under heaven may be known by

Searching no further than one's doorstep.

All ways of heaven may be known

Despite shutters blacking the window's view.

The further one pursues knowledge by

traveling apart from the unity of the Tao,

The less is one's true knowledge and understanding.

The Sage:

Knows without searching about.

Understands without looking about.

Wu-Wei ! - Doing nothing, all is attained.

Without going out the door, you can know Heaven below (the sacred body).

Without looking through a window, you can see Heaven's Tao.

The more you go away from yourself, the less you perceive.

The sage does not go out, yet knows;

does not look, yet names;

does not do, yet finishes.

THE VISION OF THE DISTANT

One need not pass his threshold to comprehend all that is under Heaven,

nor to look out from his lattice to behold the Tao Celestial. Nay! but

the farther a man goeth, the less he knoweth.

The
sages acquired their knowledge without travel; they named all things

aright without beholding them; and, acting without aim, fulfilled their

Wills.

Without going outside his door, one understands (all that takes place)under the sky; without looking out from his window, one sees the Tao ofHeaven. The farther that one goes out (from himself), the less he knows.Therefore the sages got their knowledge without traveling; gave their (right)names to things without seeing them; and accomplished their ends withoutany purpose of doing so.

Without leaving my house, I understand the whole world

Without looking outside, I see the perfect order

The more you know, the less you'll understand

One who is wise doesn't need to travel

He understands without looking

Does nothing but achieves everything

Without going out-of-doors, one can know all he needs to know. Without even looking out of his window, one can grasp the nature of everything. Without going beyond his own nature, one can achieve ultimate wisdom.

Therefore the intelligent man knows all he needs to know without going away, And he sees all he needs to see without looking elsewhere, And does all he needs to do without undue exertion.

Without leaving his door

He knows everything under heaven.

Without looking out of his window

He knows all the ways of heaven.

For the further one travels

The less one knows.

Therefore the Sage arrives without going,

Sees all without looking,

Does nothing, yet achieves everything.

Without leaving home one can know the whole world.

Without looking outside one can see heaven.

Looking afar does not find what is near.

Thus, the sage knows without learning,

sees without seeking,

acts without doing.

Without going out the door

Comprehend (all) under heaven

Without peering out the window

Observe the way of heaven

The farther beyond one goes

One's comprehension is by that much diminished

This is why wise ones (might) not move about, but still know

(Might) not witness, but still describe

(Might) not act, but still accomplish

Experience

No need to leave your door,

To know the whole world.

No need to peer through your windows,

To know the Way of Heaven.

The further you go,

the less you know.

Therefore the Sage knows without going;

Names without seeing;

And completes without doing a thing.

Without going out the door, you can know the world. Without looking out the window, you can see heaven. The farther you travel, the less you know.

Thus the wise person knows without traveling, understands without seeing, accomplishes without acting.

Without leaving home,

You can learn the Way of Nature.

Without opening your eyes,

You can walk the path of truth.

The farther you wander without,

The more you separate from realization.

Thus the student of the Sage:

He never starts an outward journey

Before there is clarity within.

He analyzes nothing,

Yet finds words for everything.

He does not strive,

Yet his work is brought to completion.

This poem is one of many teachings on meditation in the Tao Te Ching. Lao Tzu here reveals an overall guide to meditation, and its benefits. You needn't wander ceaselessly without, lusting for outer variety and experience: the entire Cosmos and its movements can be experienced in stillness, by closing or muting the outer senses. Meditation brings clarity, the kind of deep freedom from burdensome attachment that makes the "outward journey" truly fulfilling and restorative, rather than merely diversionary.

In this context, the "outward journey" takes on many layers of meaning, beyond the association of mere travel. The outward journey can mean the process of making a career choice, deciding on a proposal of marriage, healing an illness, or making a purchase that nourishes our life and accords with our inner being. When we allow the Sage and the other presences of the invisible world to nurture us toward clarity through regular meditation, our speech is simple and accurate, and our action is direct, but without force or effort.

One can know the world without leaving the house.

One can see Tao without looking out the window.

The
more you study the less you know.

Thus
the truly wise know without traveling,

perceive without seeing, achieve without doing.

The world may be known without going out of doors.

The heavenly way (Tao) may be seen without looking through the window.

The further one goes the less one knows.

Hence the Holy Man arrives without traveling; names without looking; accomplishes without action.

Without going out of the door

One can know the whole world;

Without peeping out of the window

One can see the Tao of heaven.

The further one travels

The less one knows.

Therefore the Sage knows everything without travelling;

He names everything without seeing it;

He accomplishes everything without doing it.

Ignorant Guides.

Don't step outside your door. Know the social world.

Don't look out the window. See the natural guide.

The farther you go

the less you know what to do.

Using this: Sages don't go anywhere and yet know what to do.

Don't see and yet name things.

Don't deem-act and yet accomplish.

Without going out of the gate,

One is aware of the world.

Without peering outside,

One sees the way of heaven.

The farther away one is,

The less one is aware.

Therefore, the wise is aware of all things

Without moving a step.

He identifies all things

Without looking at them.

He completes all things

Without action.

Without going outside

one can know the whole world.

Without looking out of the window

one can see the Tao of Heaven.

The further one goes, the less one knows.

Therefore the sage

without walking, knows everything,

without seeing, identifies everything,

without doing, accomplishes everything.

Without leaving the door,

You may know everything under heaven;

Without peeping through the window,

You may know heaven's Tao.

The farther you venture abroad,

The less you know.

Hence, the sage man

Knew without traveling,

Understood without seeing,

Accomplished without acting.

Without crossing the threshold of the gate

It is possible to know the entire world.

Without looking through the window

It is possible to see the Tao of heaven.

The further the person goes,

The less he knows.

Therefore the sage

Knows everything without going through the streets,

Names everything without seeing it,

Accomplishes every task without doing anything.

Without stirring abroad

One can know the whole world;

Without looking out the window

One can see the way of heaven.

The further one goes

The less one knows.

Therefore the sage knows without having to stir,

Identifies without having to see,

Accomplishes without having to act.

Viewing the Distant

"Without passing out of the gate

The world's course I prognosticate.

Without peeping through the window

The heavenly Reason I contemplate.

The further one goes,

The less one knows."

Therefore the holy man does not travel, and yet he has knowledge. He does not see things, and yet he defines them. He does not labor, and yet he completes.

You cannot go anywhere to experience the Tao. It can only be experienced here. The more knowledge you have, the less you know. The master knows without knowledge, and sees without eyes. Without thinking of success is his eternal success.

Without leaving home, one knows the world;

Without looking through the window, one discerns the cosmos's Direction.

The farther one moves about, the less one knows.

Thus,

the sage knows without moving about,

discerns without looking through the window,

accomplishes with laissez-faire.

You can know all beneath heaven though you never step out the door,

and you can see the Way of heaven though you never look out the window.

The further you explore, the less you know.

So it is that a sage knows by going nowhere, names by seeing nothing, perfects by doing nothing.

Without stepping out of the door,

He knows what the world is like.

Without looking out of the window,

He understands the way of Heaven.

The farther he travels,

The less he learns.

So the Sage:

Knows without traveling;

Understands situations without seeing, and

Succeeds without taking action.

Without
going out through doors know the world

Without seeing out through windows see the tao of the heavens

Who travels extremely far knows extremely little.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Are without going out yet know

Are without seeing out yet name

Are without acting yet perfect.

Without going out by the door, one can know the whole world; without looking through the window, one can become aware of the way of heaven (principles which rule all things). - The further one goes, the less one learns.

The Sage gets there without having taken a step to reach it. He knows before having seen, through superior principles. He achieves, without having acted, through his transcendent action.

Without going out the door, know the world

Without peering out the window, see the Heavenly Tao

The further one goes

The less one knows

Therefore the sage

Knows without going

Names without seeing

Achieves without striving

True Tao practitioners do not search frantically in the material plane for spiritual enlightenment that will allow them to understand and be at peace with the world. They find this enlightenment by looking within.

True Tao practitioners do not try to comprehend the limitless Tao of the cosmos by the limited view of a window. Instead, they see the Heavenly Tao through the infinite perception of their inner vision.

The more one attempts to know the Tao by searching in the material world, the less one will know it. The Tao is not confined to any particular place.

In the same way, the sages are the masters of wisdom no matter where they happen to be. They do not need to travel to a particular place to gain this mastery. The clarity they possess is not dependent on what they can or cannot see.

Thus, the sages are able to achieve whatever they wish easily, smoothly, gracefully and efficiently, without any strife or effort that can only get in the way.

SEEING THE DISTANT

Not going out of the door I have knowledge of the world. Not peeping through the window I perceive heaven's Tao. The more one wanders to a distance the less he knows.

Therefore the wise man does not wander about but he understands, he does not see things but he defines them, he does not labor yet he completes.

Without stepping (ts'u) out the door,

Know (chih) the world.

Without looking out the window,

See (chien) the Tao of Heaven.

The farther one comes out,

The less one knows.

Therefore the sage knows (chih) without travelling,

Names (ming) things without seeing (chien) them,

Accomplishes (cheng) without work (wei).

One can know the world without leaving the house. One can see Tao without looking out the window. The more you study the less you know. Thus the truly wise know without traveling, perceive without seeing, achive without doing.

You can know the whole world without going out the door,

You can know the Way of Heaven without looking out the window.

The further afield you go, the less you know.

The Tao–Master knows without going out;

understands without looking;

achieves without ado.

Forty-seven

Without going outside, you may know the whole world.

Without looking through the window, you may see the ways of heaven.

The farther you go, the less you know.

Thus the sage knows without traveling;

He sees without looking;

He works without doing.

Without stirring out of the house,

One can know everything in the world;

Without looking out of the window,

One can see the Tao of heaven.

The further one travels,

The less one knows.

That is why the sage

Knows everything without going out;

Sees the Tao of heaven without looking out of the window;

Succeeds without resorting to action.

Without leaving the door,

You may know all under Heaven.

Without looking out the window,

You may know the way of Heaven.

The further you go,

The less you know.

Therefore the sage

Knows without going,

Sees without looking,

Fulfills without doing.

Without stepping out of the house,

You can know what is going on in the world.

Without peering out the window,

You can understand the way of Dao.

The farther you travel, the less you really know.

Therefore, the sage knows without having to travel.

Without seeing for himself, he can understand the law of nature.

Without meddling, he accomplishes easily.

Far Seeing

Chien Yuan

Without going out of doors,

One can know the world;

Without looking through the window,

One can realize the Way of Heaven.

The farther one goes,

The less one knows.

Therefore, the Sage knows without going out,

Discriminates without seeing,

And accomplishes without action.

Without going out of his own door

A man may know the world;

Without looking out of his own window

A man man know the Tao of Heaven.

For the farther one goes

The less one knows.

Thus it is with the Sage:

He does not go forth, and yet he attains his goal;

Although he does no look around him, he is able to give things their names;

Without fuss he brings all to completion by Non-action.

Without going out of the door

You can know beneath-heaven.

Without looking out of the window

You can see heaven's way.

The farther you go,

The less you know.

Thus the sage

Knows without walking,

Sees without looking,

And does without doing.

Without going out of your door, you can know the ways of the world.

Without looking through your window, you can see the Way of Heaven.

The farther you go, the less you know.

Thus, one of deep virtue knows without going,

sees without looking,

and accomplishes without doing.

XLVII.

Surveying
the Far-off

Without
going beyond his doorway

One
may know all beneath the sky,

Without
peeping out from his window

See
the Tao of Heaven go by;

And
the farther he goes from home he finds

That
knowledge becomes less nigh.

So
the sages did not travel

To
acquire a knowledge of things,

They
named them aright without wasting

Their
life in vain journeyings;

And,
striving not, accomplished ends

By
the power which quietude brings.

Without going out of my door I know the Universe.

Without opening my window I perceive Heavenly Tao.

The more I go abroad, the less I understand.

That is why the self-controlled man arrives without going, names things without seeing them, perfects without activity.

Without

going out of

your door,

You

can know

the ways

of the world.

Without

looking through

your window,

You

can see

the Tao

(the Laws of the Universe).

You can travel far,

And know very little.

The Complete Thinker

knows

without traveling,

Sees

without looking,

And achieves

without Effort.

(Because they understand

the Laws of the Universe and

the Power of their application.)

To know All-under-heaven without going out of doors!

Without peeping out of the window, to see the Way of Heaven!

The further one goes out, the less one knows.

Therefore: the Saint knows without travelling, names (things) without seeing them, achieves without acting.

Without going outside his door, one understands (all that takes

place) under the sky; without looking out from his window, one sees

the Tao of Heaven. The farther that one goes out (from himself), the

less he knows.

Therefore
the sages got their knowledge without travelling; gave

their (right) names to things without seeing them; and accomplished

their ends without any purpose of doing so.

Without going out of doors,
one may know all under heaven.
Without
peering into windows,
one may know the secrets of the Universe.

The
farther one goes,
the less one knows!
For
this reason,
the Sage knows without needing to journey;
understands
without needing to look;
and accomplishes without needing to act.

No
need to go outside a door

To see totality

Or look out of a window

For seeing what will always be

Going
out you go astray

At home and center all is one

The seer doesn't have to do

To see that everything is done

WITHOUT going out of your door,

You can know the ways of the world.

Without peeping through your window,

You can see the Way of Heaven.

The farther you go,

The less you know.

Thus, the Sage knows without travelling,

Sees vithout looking,

And achieves without Ado.

One can open oneself to the world without leaving the house,

Without looking out the window one can know the way of Heaven.

The further one goes and the more knowledge one accumulates, the less one knows.

With this way; the master knows and experiences without traveling,

Observes clearly without seeing,

And accomplishes much without doing anything.

Without opening your door,

you can know the whole world.

Without looking out your window,

you can understand the way of the Tao.

The
more knowledge you seek,

the less you will understand.

The
Master understands without leaving,

sees clearly without looking,

accomplishes much without doing anything.

The wise leader knows what is happening in a group by being aware of what is happening here and now. This is more potent than wandering off into various theories or making complex interpretations of the situation at hand.

Stillness, clarity, and consciousness are more immediate than any number of expeditions into the distant lands of one's mind.

Such expeditions, however stimulating, distract both the leader and the group members from what is actually happening.

By staying present and aware of what is happening, the leader can do less yet achieve more.

Without going outside, You can know the whole world.

Without looking out the window,

You can know Heaven's Way.

The further out you seek

The less you understand.

Therefore, the Sage

Knows without needing to travel,

Understands without needing to see,

Accomplishes without "doing."

Because
you are at one with Infinity,

you can experience the world without

leaving your home.

Without looking out the window

you can see the manifestations of Infinity.

The further you carry your distinctions

and your judgments,

the more confused and lost you become.

Thus
the sage experiences all things

without traveling;

without looking she sees Infinity.

She
works without laboring.

Without going out the door, you may know the things beneath Heaven.

Without looking out the window, you may behold Heaven's Way.

The further you go, the less you know.

Thus does the wise man know without going,

see without looking, achieve without doing.

Without going out of doors

One can know the whole world.

Without looking through the window

One can see the Way of Heaven.

The further one goes,

The less one knows.

Thus the Sage knows without going out;

Understands without looking;

And accomplishes without acting.

Without going out of the door,

One can feel the world.

Without looking out of the window,

One can feel the universe.

The farther one goes,

The less one knows.

Therefore,

The wise person arrives without traveling,

Knows without seeing,

And achieves without willful actions.

Understanding the world without going out the door. Understanding Heaven's Way without looking out the window. Traveling very widely, understanding very little.

And so the Wise Person: Knows without any going names without any looking accomplishes without any doing.

The wise cognizes the world without leaving his house. Without looking from the window, he sees the Primordial Tao. He does not travel far to know more.

The wise does not travel — yet he knows everything; he does not look — yet he can describe everything; he seems to be non-acting — yet he achieves everything.

In his heart he finds everything what is necessary.*

This is why the wise knows the things which cannot be reached by walking. And he can see the invisible to the common eye.

* Here the author means not the physical but spiritual heart — developed through the methods of buddhi yoga to a large size. Inside this heart one cognizes Tao. From this heart one finds ways leading to other beings.

The knowledge has to come from the inside.

The human mind can take various forms.

Thus, without going out the world can be known,

Without looking out of the window, the sky can be known.

The more we look at the external forms, the less we know them.

The Wise Person will reach the destination

Even without starting the trip.

He can see the light without using his eyes.

He knows without doing any research.

He can do everything by being always at rest.

Know
the whole world without going outdoors. Perceive the Dao of Heaven without peeking
out the window. The further one goes the less one knows. For this reason the
Sage knows without going anywhere, perceives clearly without looking, and makes
accomplishments without doing anything.

Without going out-of-doors,

One can know the whole world.

Without looking out of windows,

One can see the Tao of heaven.

The farther one goes, the less one knows.

Therefore, the Sage does not go and yet knows,

Doesn't see and yet names,

Doesn't act and yet completes.

Cultivating Inner-Knowledge

Without going out of doors,

Know the world.

Without looking through the window,

See the Tao in Nature.

One may travel very far,

And know very little.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals

Know without going about,

Recognize without looking,

Achieve without acting.

Sip tea and achieve. Read books to gain and deteriorate. You need not journey ten thousand miles to see the world. You need not follow a river to know its source.

The world may be known

Without leaving the house;

The Way may be seen

Apart from the windows.

The further you go,

The less you will know.

Accordingly,
the Wise Man

Knows without going,

Sees without seeing,

Does without doing.

Without going out of the door, one can now things under Heaven.

Without looking through the window, one can see the Way (Tao) of Heaven.

The farther one goes, the less one knows.

Therefore the sage knows without going through,

Understands without seeing,

And accomplishes without doing anything.

Know all under Heaven without even leaving your gate;

see the Dao of Heaven without even peering out your window.

The farther one goes out, the less he will know.

Thus it is that the sage knows without making a move and names without seeing.

He brings about the completion of things without taking action.

1. No need to leave your door to know the whole world;

2. No need to peer through your windows to know the Way of Heaven.

3. The farther you go, the less you know.

4.
Therefore the Sage knows without going,

5. Names without seeing,

6. And completes without doing a thing.

You don't have
to leave your room

to understand what's happening in the world.

You don't have
to look out the window

to appreciate the beauty of heaven.

The farther
you wander,

the less you know.

The Masters
don't wander around

They know.

They don't just look.

They understand.

They don't do anything,

but the work gets done.

.

Understanding

One can know the world without going outside.

One can see the Way of heaven

without looking out the window.

The further one goes the less one knows.

Therefore the wise know without going about,

understand without seeing,

and accomplish without acting.

Without leaving one's house one may know the world.

Without looking out of the window one may perceive the Highest.

One who looks around a great deal loses insight.

That is why the Sage knows without moving about.

He comprehends without looking and completes without doing.

Pursuit of Knowledge

Lao Tze says,

Without stepping outside the door, a man can know what has taken place in the world.

Without looking out the window, a man can discern the Tao of Heaven.

The farther a man goes out, the less he knows.

Therefore, the sages got their knowledge not through visiting there;

gave their names to things not because they had seen them;

and accomplished their ends not because they ever had intent to control fate.

DISCOVERING THE DISTANT

The
Tao may be known and observed

without the need of travel;

the way of the heavens might be well seen

without looking through a window.

The
further one travels,

the less one knows.

So, without looking, the sage sees all,

and by working without self-advancing thought,

he discovers the wholeness of the Tao.

Without opening your door,

you can open your heart to the world.

Without looking out your window,

you can see the essence of the Tao.

The more you know,

the less you understand.

The Master arrives without leaving,

sees the light without looking,

achieves without doing a thing.

Without leaving the door one may know the course of the world.

Without looking through the window one may see the law of nature.

The maximum extreme possesses a minimum of knowledge.

Hence a sage ruler knew without traveling;

designated without seeing;

and accomplished without interfering.

In order to know the world, do not step outside the door.

In order to know the Tao of heaven, do not peer through the window.

The further out you go, the less you know.

So the sage knows without moving, identifies without seeing, accomplishes without acting.

XLVII

If
you know where you are, you know the world

You do not need to look out a window to see the tao

The more you look, the less you really see

So the taoist stays and lets things come to him

Sees things without looking for them

Finishes things by not trying to make them complete

Without Even Going out the Door

They know the world

without even going out the door.

They see the sky and its pattern

without even looking out the window.

The further out it goes, the less knowledge is;

therefore sages know without going,

name without seeing,

complete without striving.

Without leaving home, one can know the world.

Without watching through window, one can know astronomy.

The farther one travels, the less one understands.

Therefore, the sage knows without traveling, understands without seeing, and succeeds without forcing.

Without going out of your door, you are aware of the world.

Without looking out of your window, you see the Way of Heaven.

The farther one goes, the less one knows.

Thus, the sage knows without going out, sees without looking, and achieves without doing.

Without traveling, we could know the world.

Without looking through the window, we could see the Tao of heaven.

The farther you go, the less you know.

Thus the sage knows without traveling.

He knows things without actually seeing them.

He success without effort.

Without going outside

you can know the ways of the world.

Without looking through the window

you can see the way of heaven.

The farther you go

the less you know.

Therefore,
the Trne Person

arrives without traveling,

perceives without looking,

and acts without striving.

Without
leaving your house

without looking outside

you can understand

the whole world.

The more you search

the less you will find

the
more information you acquire

the less you will know

the
more you travel

the less you will feel at home.

Arrive
without leaving

see without looking

do nothing yet everything.

One can know whats happening all over the world without going out of doors.

One can see the dao of the big wide beyond here without looking out of ones
windows, and see all the ways of that beyond-here.

Then, the further one travels the less one knows.

So the wise man can [at times] arrive without going and know without going about;
he can understand much without seeing -

or achieve much without [visible] action.

Without going out-of-doors,

one may know all under heaven;

Without peering through windows,

one may know the Way of heaven.

The farther one goes,

The less one knows.

For this reason,

The sage

knows without journeying,

understands without looking,

accomplishes without acting.

A man may know the world without leaving his own home.

Through his windows he can see the supreme Tao.

The further afield he goes the less likely is he to find it.

Therefore the wise man knows without travelling, names things without seeing them, and accomplishes everything without action.

A Sacred Space

Your love requires space in which to grow.

This space must be safe enough

to allow your hearts to be revealed.

It must offer refreshment for your spirits

and renewal for your minds.

It must be a space made sacred

by the quality of your honesty,

attention, love, and compassion.

It may be anywhere,

inside or out,

but it must exist.

My spouse and I have a small altar

in the corner of our bedroom.

A budding branch, some candles, water, earth

and other tokens of our lives rest there.

Before it we have talked, meditated,

laughed and cried.

In this space we have danced

and joined in sacred passion.

Where is your space?

One may know the world without going out of doors. One may see the Way
of Heaven without looking through the windows. The further one goes,
the less one knows.

Therefore the sage knows without going about, Understands without seeing, And accomplishes without any action.

There is no
need to run outside

For better seeing,

Nor to peer from a window. Rather abide

At the center of your being;

For the more you leave it, the less you learn.

Search your heart and see

If he is wise who takes each turn:

The way to do is to be.

Without traveling, you can know what happens in the world.

Without looking out the window, you can know what happens in the universe.

The more you travel, the less you know.

Therefore, the great men knew everything without traveling,

Recognized everything without seeing it personally,

Accomplished everything by WUWEI.

Without going out the door,

You can know the ways of the world.

Without looking out the window,

You can know the ways of heaven.

The farther you go outward, the less you know.

Thus, the sage knows without going outward,

Understands without looking outward,

Accomplishes without acting outward.

Without going out of the door,

One can feel the world.

Without looking out of the window,

One can feel the universe.

The farther one goes,

The less one knows.

Therefore,

The wise person arrives without traveling,

Knows without seeing,

And achieves without willful actions.

One can open oneself to the world without leaving the house,

Without looking out the window one can know the way of Heaven.

The further one goes and the more knowledge one accumulates, the less one knows.

With this way; the master knows and experiences without traveling,

Observes clearly without seeing,

And accomplishes much without doing anything.

