===== Chapter 16 =====

Bring about emptiness to the extreme.

Guard true stillness.

The ten-thousand things rise together.

I therefore observe their return:

Those ten-thousand plants—each plant—returns

Going back to its root.

Going back to the root is said to be stillness.

This is called returning to life.

Returning to life is called the Constant.

Understanding the Constant is called clarity.

Not understanding the Constant:

Reckless actions—misfortune.

Understanding the Constant, forgive.

Forgive, then be unbiased.

Be unbiased, then be whole.

Be whole, then be Heaven.

Be Heaven, then be Tao.

Be Tao, then be eternal.

Not having a body, there is no danger.

Attain complete emptiness, Hold fast to stillness.

The ten thousand things stir about; I only watch for their going back. Things grow and grow, But each goes back to its root.

Going back to the root is stillness. This means returning to what is. Returning to what is Means going back to the ordinary.

Understanding the ordinary: Enlightenment. Not understanding the
ordinary: Blindness creates evil. Understanding the ordinary: Mind
opens. Mind opening leads to compassion, Compassion to nobility,
Nobility to heavenliness, Heavenliness to Tao.

Tao endures. Your body dies. There is no danger.

Empty yourself to the utmost.

Remain perfectly calm.

The myriad things arise together

I watch their return.

They flourish, then each goes back to its root.

To go back to the root is to find tranquility.

To find tranquility is to come back to life.

Coming back to life is what is constant.

To know what is constant is to be enlightened.

Not to know what is constant is to court disaster.

When you know what is constant you embrace everything.

When you embrace everything you are just.

When you are just you are kingly.

When you are kingly you follow nature.

Following nature you follow Tao.

Following Tao you last through all time.

Till the end of life, you will suffer no harm.

THE CYCLE OF ALL THINGS

Let the mind be empty of preconceptions and distraction -

Permit a meditative quietness to prevail.

Observe the cycle of All Things -

Their birth and rise to activity,

A flourishing,

And ultimate return to their generative roots.

Quietness, repose and tranquility characterize the return to the roots of creation.

Knowing it as the destiny of All Things -

An unchanging cycle, An eternal law of nature -

Is to be enlightened.

To know it not, is to court misfortune.

Knowing the eternal law is to be all embracing.

All embracing is to be impartial.

Impartial is to be noble.

Being noble is to be one with nature.

Being one with nature is to be in accord with the Tao.

Being in accord with the Tao -

Essence is everlasting.

Tho' body/self demise, the self is eternal.

Attain the highest emptiness.

Keep a constant stillness.

Ten-thousand things (everything) come into being and flourish in unison.

I witness the return.

Now all things can flourish, flourish.

Every one is restored and returns to the origin.

The return to the origin is known as stillness.

This is called a return to life.

Repeating life is known as eternal.

Perceiving the eternal speaks of the light.

Not perceiving the eternal is an error that brings calamity.

Experience of the eternal is all-embracing.

The all-embracing opens and reveals.

The act of revealing connects Heaven, Humanity and Earth.

The act of connecting Heaven, Humanity and Earth is heaven.

Heaven is the Tao.

The Tao is enduring.

Till the end, the body is not in peril.

THE WITHDRAWAL TO THE ROOT

Emptiness must be perfect, and Silence made absolute with tireless

strength. All things pass through the period of action; then they return

to repose. They grow, bud, blossom and fruit; then they return to the

root. This return to the root is this state which we name Silence; and

this Silence is Witness of their Fulfilment.

This
cycle is the universal law. To know it is the part of intelligence;

to ignore it bringeth folly of action, whereof the end is madness. To know it

bringeth understanding and peace; and these lead to the identification of

the Self with the Not-Self. This identification maketh man a king; and

this kingliness groweth unto godhood. That godhood beareth fruit in the

mastery of the Tao. Then the man, the Tao permeating him, endureth; and

his bodily principles are in harmony, proof against decay, until the

hour of his Change.

Who ascends the peak of Emptiness Will reach serenity. All Beings doI see arise and then return whence they came. To return to one's originmeans to acquiesce. To acquiesce means to have fulfilled one's destiny.To fulfill one's destiny means to have comprehended eternity. To comprehendeternity means to be enlightened. Not to comprehend eternity means to besubject of passions, and that is evil. Comprehending eternity makes onemagnanimous. Magnanimity makes one just. To be just is Kingly. The Kinglyis Heavenly. The Heavenly is the Spiritual. The Spirit is Immortal. Andthus the ephemerality of the body can not harm us.

One who has an empty head is satisfied, One who is satisfied has an empty head

All creatures exert and come to rest

All plants grow to maturity and come to rest

That final rest is what's called being done; completion

Returning to nature is what's called eternal life

Living in the present is called being enlightened

One who is not enlightened lives in confusion and misery

One who lives according to his nature understands everything and is forbearing

One who is forbearing is righteous

One who is righteous is royal

One who is royal is divine

One who is divine knows oneself

One who knows oneself has eternal life

One who has eternal life is not afraid to die

In order to arrive at complete contentment, restrain your ambitions.

For everything which comes into being eventually returns again to the source from which it came. Each thing which grows and develops to the fullness of its own nature completes its course by declining again in a manner inherently determined by its own nature.

Completing its life is as inevitable as that each thing shall have its own goal. Each thing having its own goal is necessary to the nature of things.

He who knows that this is the ultimate nature of things is intelligent; he who does not is not. Being intelligent, he knows that each has a nature which is able to take care of itself. Knowing this, he is willing that each thing follow its own course. Being willing to let each thing follow its own course, he is gracious. Being gracious, he is like the source which graciously gives life to all. Being like the gracious source of all, he embodies Nature's way within his own being. And in thus embodying Nature's way within himself, he embodies its perpetually recurrent principles within himself.

And so, regardless of what happens to his body, there is somethng about him which goes on forever.

Push far enough towards the Void,

Hold fast enough to Quietness,

And of the ten thousand things none but can be worked on by you.

I have beheld them, whither they go back.

See, all things howsoever they flourish

Return to the root from which they grew.

This return to the root is called Quietness;

Quietness is called submission to Fate;

What has submitted to Fate has become part of the always so.

To know the always-so is to be Illumined;

Not to know it, means to go blindly to disaster.

He who knows the always-so has room in him for everything;

He who has room in him for everything is without prejudice.

To be without prejudice is to be kingly;

To be kingly is to be of heaven;

To be of heaven is to be in Tao.

Tao is forever and he that possess it,

Though his body ceases, is not destroyed.

Be completely empty.

Be completely still.

Witness the ten thousand things

appear and vanish in one motion.

Watch as they arise, linger,

and return to the source—stillness.

This is the way it is.

It is called everlasting life.

To witness the everlasting is to be awake.

Not seeing the everlasting, one engages in blind action.

Blind action leads to misfortune.

Seeing the everlasting, one encompasses all.

Encompassing all, one is impartial.

Being impartial, one acts nobly.

Acting nobly, one enters heaven.

Entering heaven is to be one with Tao.

Being one with Tao is to be everlasting.

Though the body dies, nothing is disturbed.

Attaining perfect emptiness

Remain patient & sincere

The myriad beings arise as one

Through this we observe the return

Of beings in numberless multitudes

Each coming home to its root

Return to the root means serenity

It may be called a return to a higher order

Return to higher order speaks of the enduring

To comprehend the enduring speaks of clarity

To not comprehend the enduring

Is to recklessly create suffering

To comprehend the enduring (is) tolerance

Tolerance becomes justice

Justice becomes sovereignty

Sovereignty becomes celestial

The celestial becomes the path

The path is then continuous

The death of self is nothing to fear

Trancending nature

To reach Emptyness is what we mean by the extreme.

To maintain tranquility is what we mean by the center

Side by side, the ten thousand things rise and fall

And by this I see their return.

Things come forth in great numbers;

Each one returns to its source.

This is called tranquility,

"Tranquility" - This mean to return to your fate.

To return to your fate is to be constant.

To know the constant is to be wise.

Not to know the constant is to be reckless and wild.

If you're reckless and wild,

Your actions will lead to misfortune.

To know the constant, is to be open-minded.

To be open-minded, is to be impartial.

To be impartial, is to act royally.

To be royal, is to be like Heaven.

To be like Heaven is to be [one with] the Tao.

If you are one with the Tao,

You will suffer no harm till the end of your days,

Work toward emptiness and openness. Cultivate stillness. Breathe harmony. Become tranquility.

As the ten thousand things rise and fall, rise and fall, just witness their return to the root.

Everything that flourishes dissolves again into the source. To dissolve back into the source is to find peace. To find peace is to recover your true nature. To recover your true nature is to know the constancy of Tao. To know the constancy of Tao is insight.

Insight opens your mind. An open mind leads to an open heart. Openheartedness leads to justice. Justice is an expression of divinity. Divinity is oneness with Tao.

Oneness with Tao is freedom from harm, indescribable pleasure, eternal life.

While sitting in stillness,

Connect with the Cosmic Harmony.

By clearing the space within,

In steadfast quietude,

Let your true self observe

The numberless compressions of consciousness:

How they arise and recede,

Coming into being and blooming;

Retreating at last toward the Cosmic Origin.

Return to the root, to the primal nature,

Is the way of all beings.

Let your awareness contemplate

The eternal cycle of return,

And your insight will deepen in this.

The understanding that is nurtured

On the dispersion of ignorance

Perpetually broadens its perspective.

To embrace the way of return,

To feel the immutable equality of being,

Nurtures equanimity and justice.

To live in the Tao means abiding in the eternal-

Perceiving completely, with all one's being:

Life is never exhausted;

It is only delusion that dies.

This poem again reveals Lao Tzu's familiarity with the I Ching, for it evokes and draws upon Hexagram 24 of that text, which is called "Returning." To the poet(s) of the I Ching, "Returning" is about feeling the cycle death-and-life in every moment, in the same way that beauty and truth become one within an open heart.

This is an accurate summation of the theme of Chapter 16 of Lao Tzu as well, for it is what the poet means by "the dispersion of ignorance," and "it is only delusion that dies."

Also in Hexagram 24, the original text of the Judgment says, "to and fro goes the way." This is the dance of form and non-form described by Lao Tzu in this poem: forms arise and recede; they are born, flourish, and then retreat to their Cosmic Origin. And indeed, "life is never exhausted," for this return to non-form is followed by transformation back into form as the dance of consciousness endlessly perpetuates. We can truly experience this Cosmic Principle of returning, by "clearing the space within" in meditation, and by separating ourselves from the rigid prejudice of ignorance and false belief. This process of allowing inner clarity to develop opens understanding and "nurtures equanimity and justice." It is a self-perpetuating and deeply nourishing inner experience that never seems to run its course, but is always complete in itself, each time we allow it to arise.

Chapter 16 is a deeply moving poem. It is a literary meditation on death-as-life: forthright, dignified, and utterly free of false sentiment or ideology. To inwardly perceive the Cosmic principle of returning is to see beyond the realm of the apparent; it is the natural and most nourishing movement of the human heart.

Achieve the highest goal by being passive;

hold close to a state of perfect serenity.

Everything
comes into existence,

but observe, returns to its source.

Thus, vegetation flourishes and grows,

but returns to the soil whence it came.

Returning
to the source is serenity;

it is to realize one's destiny.

To realize one's destiny

is to know the Eternal Constant.

To know the Eternal Constant

is to be enlightened.

To be ignorant of this

is blindness that begets evil.

Whoever
knows the Eternal Constant

is open-minded. Being open-minded

is to be impartial. Being impartial

is to be above nations and laws.

Being
above nations and laws

is to be in accord with nature.

Being in accord with nature

is to be in accord with Tao.

Being in accord with Tao

is to be eternal.

Although
his body may die and decay,

he shall live forever.

Abstraction complete, quiescence maintained unalloyed, the various forms rise with one accord, and I observe that each returns again. All things thrive and increase, then each returns again to the root. This return to the root is called "stillness," or it may be described as a return to report that they have fulfilled

their destiny. This report is called "the unchanging rule."

Knowledge of this unchanging rule is called "illumination." Those who are ignorant of it give way to abandon and to recklessness.

Knowledge of this unchanging rule leads to toleration.

Toleration leads to comprehension.

Comprehension leads to sovereignty.

Sovereignty leads to heavenlikeness.

Heaven-likeness leads to Tao.

Tao leads to continuity.

Though the body be no more, there is no danger.

Attain to the goal of absolute vacuity; Keep to the state of perfect peace.

All things come into existence, And thence we see them return. Look at the things that have been flourishing; Each goes back to its origin.

Going back to the origin is called peace; It means reversion to destiny. Reversion to destiny is called eternity. He who knows eternity is called enlightened. He who does not know eternity is running blindly into miseries.

Knowing eternity he is all-embracing. Being all~embracing he can attain magnanimity. Being magnanimous he can attain omnipresence. Being omnipresent he can attain supremacy. Being supreme he can attain Tao.

He who attains Tao is everlasting. Though his body may decay he never perishes.

Being a Guide

Go to the limit of emptiness

Take on quiet dependability

The ten-thousand natural kinds are all dealt with.

And I thus view their response

In general, natural kinds flourish.

Each responds by returning to its root.

Returning to the root is called quietude.

This I call responding to the word.

Responding to the word we describe as 'constant'.

To know what is constant we describe as 'discernment'.

Not to know what is constant is wantonly taking risks.

To know what is constant is openness;

Open thus equitable;

Equitable thus kingly;

Kingly thus natural;

Natural thus guiding;

Guiding thus enduring

Doesn't stop when you bury the body.

Contemplate the ultimate void.

Remain truly in quiescence.

All things are together in action,

But I look into their non-action.

Things are unceasingly moving and restless,

Yet each one is proceeding back to the origin.

Proceeding back to the origin is quiescence.

To be in quiescence is to return to the destiny of being.

The destiny of being is reality.

To understand reality is to be enlightened.

Not to understand it, and to act wrongly, leads to disaster.

Reality is all-embracing.

To be all-embracing is to be selfless.

To be selfless is to be all-pervading.

To be all-pervading is to be transcendent.

To be transcendent is to attain Tao.

To attain Tao is to be everlasting.

Even when the body dies, it is not the end.

Do one's best to achieve emptiness.

Hold firmly to stillness.

All things on earth follow the same cycle.

I observe their return.

All the teeming creatures return to their roots.

Returning to the root is called stillness.

Stillness means to return to life.

A return to life means constancy.

Understanding constancy means enlightenment.

Not knowing constancy leads to evil deeds.

Knowing constancy is knowing tolerance.

Tolerance is impartiality.

Impartiality is the skilful exercise of kingship.

Kingship is Heaven.

Heaven is Tao.

Tao is eternity.

Until the end of one's own life, one will meet no danger.

Attain emptiness to the utmost;

Adhere to stillness indefatigably.

The ten thousand things rise everywhere;

I thereby observe their revolution.

While things grow exuberantly,

Each will again revert to its root,

Which means stillness;

Stillness means reverting to life;

Reverting to life is the constant.

Knowing the constant is clear-sighted.

Not knowing the constant is blind;

Acting blindly is disastrous.

Knowing the constant leads to all-embracingness;

All-embracingness leads to impartiality;

Impartiality leads to kingliness;

Kingliness leads to heaven;

Heaven leads to the Tao;

The Tao leads to permanence;

A lifetime without peril.

Devote yourself to the goal of achieving absolute serenity,

Aspire to a state of perfect peace.

All things come into existence,

And we see them return.

Look at the things that bloomed and flowered,

Each of them returns to its source.

The return to the source is called serenity,

Which means following destiny,

Following destiny is eternal, it is eternity.

He who knows eternity is enlightened.

He who does not know eternity runs blindly

To his pain and suffering.

Knowledge of eternity, is all-embracing.

Since he embraces everything, he will achieve greatness.

Since he grasps greatness, he can attain perfection.

When he reaches perfection, he will attain supremacy.

When he is supreme, he will come to the Tao.

The person who achieves the Tao exists forever.

Even if his body decays, he will never perish.

I do my utmost to attain emptiness;

I hold firmly to stillness.

The myriad creatures all rise together

And I watch their return.

The teaming creatures

All return to their separate roots.

Returning to one's roots is known as stillness.

This is what is meant by returning to one's destiny.

Returning to one's destiny is known as the constant.

Knowledge of the constant is known as discernment.

Woe
to him who wilfully innovates

While ignorant of the constant,

But should one act from knowledge of the constant

One's action will lead to impartiality,

Impartiality to kingliness,

Kingliness to heaven,

Heaven to the way,

The way to perpetuity,

And to the end of one's days one will meet with no danger.

Returning to the Root

By attaining the height of abstraction we gain fulness of rest.

All the ten thousand things arise, and I see them return. Now they bloom in bloom but each one homeward returneth to its root.

Returning to the root means rest. It signifies the return according to destiny. Return according to destiny means the eternal. Knowing the eternal means enlightenment. Not knowing the eternal causes passions to rise; and that is evil.

Knowing the eternal renders comprehensive. Comprehensiveness renders broad. Breadth renders royal. Royalty renders heavenly. Heaven renders Reason-like. Reason renders lasting. Thus the decay of the body implies no danger.

Empty the mind by not thinking of gain or loss. Follow your heart in all matters and the mind isn't stirred. Even though the misery of others is apparent, you contemplate their ultimate destiny. That destiny is enlightenment. Being one with the Tao is enlightenment. Here you are serenely impartial. Being someone is a delusion. Here you are separate and confused. Impartial, you shine on existence like the sun, caring not what or who you shine on. At one with the Tao, birth and death cannot touch you.

Aim at the supreme hollow, reach for the utmost serenity.

Matters bloom in myriad diversity.

I watch for periodicity.

Matters blossom and return to their roots.

Returning to roots leads to serenity.

Serenity leads to regeneration.

Regeneration leads to normalcy.

Knowing normalcy leads to comprehension.

Not knowing normalcy, indiscretion leads to misfortune.

Knowing normalcy is all-accommodating;

All-accommodating is non-discriminating.

Non-discriminating is all-encompassing.

All-encompassing is the cosmos.

Cosmos is Direction.

Direction is long lasting.

[One who follows Direction] is unlikely to encounter danger throughout life.

Inhabit the furthest peripheries of emptiness and abide in the tranquil center.

There the ten thousand things arise, and in them I watch the return:

all things on and ever on each returning to its root.

Returning to the root is called tranquility,

tranquility is called returning to the inevitable unfolding of things,

returning to the inevitable unfolding of things is called constancy,

and to understand constancy is called enlightenment.

Without understanding constancy, you stumble deceived.

But understanding constancy, you're all-embracing,

all-embracing and therefore impartial,

impartial and therefore imperial,

imperial and therefore heaven,

heaven and therefore Way,

Way and therefore enduring:

self gone, free of danger.

Attain the utmost emptiness of mind,

Maintain the utmost stillness.

While all things are simultaneously developing,

I can observe their cycles.

Though everything is flourishing, each will return to its root,

Returning to the root means stillness, and

Stillness marks the cycle of life.

The cycle of life is an eternal truth,

Knowing the truth is called enlightenment,

Not knowing the truth and acting blindly results in disaster.

Knowing the truth enhances forbearance,

Forbearance leads to objectivity,

Objectivity becomes the universal rule,

The universal rule is in accord with Nature, and

Nature is in harmony with Tao.

Tao is everlasting, and

Prevails over one's lifetime.

Taking
emptiness to the limit

Observing stillness genuinely

Regarding the 10000 things as side-by-side

It happens that I view the return.

In
the end things grow and flourish

Each returns, merging with its root.

Merging
with the root, say still

Appropriately it is called returning to giving birth.

Returning
to giving birth, say entireness

Knowing entireness say illuminated

Without knowing entireness presumptuously do the faminous.

Knowing
entireness is tolerance

Tolerance leads to impartiality

Impartiality leads to kingliness

Kingliness leads to the heavens

The heavens lead to tao

Tao leads to what is long-lasting.

Be
without a body, lack danger.

He who has reached the maximum of emptiness (of indifference) will be firmly fixed in peace.

Innumerable beings come out (from non-being), and I see them return there. They spring forth, then they all return to their root.

To return to one's root, is to enter into the state of rest. From this rest they emerge for a new destiny, and so it goes on, continually, without end. To recognize this law of immutable continuity (of the two states of life and death), is wisdom. To ignore it, is foolish. Those ignorant of this law cause misfortune (through their untimely interference in things).

He who knows that this law weighs heavily on beings, is just (treats all beings according to their nature, with equity), like a King, like Heaven, like the Principle.

In consequence he lasts until the end of his days, not having made himself any enemies.

Attain the ultimate emptiness

Hold on to the truest tranquility

The myriad things are all active

I therefore watch their return

Everything flourishes; each returns to its root

Returning to the root is called tranquility

Tranquility is called returning to one's nature

Returning to one's nature is called constancy

Knowing constancy is called clarity

Not knowing constancy, one recklessly causes trouble

Knowing constancy is acceptance

Acceptance is impartiality

Impartiality is sovereign

Sovereign is heaven

Heaven is Tao

Tao is eternal

The self is no more, without danger

Reach for a state of ultimate emptiness. Maintain a state of the utmost stillness and tranquility.

All living things rise up in lively activity. I watch them and observe their return in the endless natural process of life.

Everything is thriving and flourishing, and eventually everything will return to its origin in the recurrent cycles of nature.

Returning to the point of origin leads to a state of peaceful and serene tranquility.

This tranquility and quietude leads to a return to one's true nature.

The return to one's true self and fulfillment of one's true nature, is a constant, unchanging principle.

Understanding this constant, unchanging principle leads to clarity, illumination and enlightenment.

Those who do not understand the principle of constancy tend to bring upon themselves problems and disasters in a chaotic way.

Knowledge of this constant, unchanging principle leads to an acceptance that encompasses everything.

Such an all-encompassing acceptance and tolerance leads to an objective, impartial frame of mind.

This objectivity leads to authentic personal power - power over one's own destiny.

Authentic power - sovereignty over oneself - leads to a heavenly divinity and a oneness with nature. This heavenly oneness leads to the Tao. The Tao, in turn, leads to everlasting eternity.

Knowing this, one can live out an entire lifetime in harmony and safety. You will be free from worldly hazards until your body no longer exists.

RETURNING TO THE SOURCE

Seek to attain an open mind (the summit of vacuity). Seek composure (the essence of tranquillity).

All things are in process, rising and returning. Plants come to blossom, but only to return to the root. Returning to the root is like seeking tranquillity; it is moving towards its destiny. To move toward destiny is like eternity. To know eternity is enlightenment, and not to recognize eternity brings disorder and evil.

Knowing eternity makes one comprehensive; comprehension makes one broadminded; breadth of vision brings nobility; nobility is like heaven.

The heavenly is like Tao. Tao is the Eternal. The decay of the body is not to be feared.

Reach the pole of emptiness (hsü-chi),

Abide in genuine quietude (ching).

Ten thousand beings flourish together,

I am to contemplate (kuan) their return (fu).

Now things grow profusely,

Each again returns (kuei) to its root.

To return to the root is to attain quietude (ching),

It is called to recover life (ming).

To recover life is to attain the Everlasting (ch'ang),

To know the Everlasting (ch'ang) is to be illumined (ming).

Not knowing (chih) the Everlasting (ch'ang),

One commits evils wantonly.

Knowing the Everlasting one becomes all containing (yung).

To be all containing is to be public (kung).

To be public is to be kingly (wang).

To be kingly is to be like heaven.

To be like heaven is to be like Tao.

To be like Tao is to last long.

This is to lose the body without becoming exhausted (pu tai).

Achieve the highest goal by being passive; hold close to a state of perfect serenity.

Everything comes into existence, but observe, returns to its source. Thus, vegetation flourishes and grows, but returns to the soil whence it came.

Returning to the source is serenity; it is to realize one's destiny. To realize one's destiny is to know the Eternal Constant. To know the Eternal Constant is to be enlightened. To be ignorant of this is blindness that begets evil.

Whoever knows the Eternal Constant is open?minded. Being open?minded is to be impartial, being impartial is to be above nations and laws, being above nations and laws is to be in accord with nature, being in accord with nature is to be in accord with Tao; being in accord with Tao is to be eternal. Although your body dies and decays you live forever.

Empty yourself.

Be calm.

The ten thousand things come and go.

Just watch them.

All things return to the Source, where there is stillness.

To return to the Source is to recover what is permanent.

Knowing what is permanent: enlightenment.

Not knowing what is permanent: disaster.

Knowing what is permanent opens the mind.

Open mind, open heart.

Open heart, magnanimity.

Magnanimity, a virtue of queens and kings.

A true queen or king lives in accord with Nature.

To live in accord with Nature is to find the Tao.

Following the Tao makes death harmless.

Sixteen

Empty yourself of everything.

Let the mind become still.

The ten thousand things rise and fall while the Self watches their return.

They grow and flourish and then return to the source.

Returning to the source is stillness, which is the way of nature.

The way of nature is unchanging.

Knowing constancy is insight.

Not knowing constancy leads to disaster.

Knowing constancy, the mind is open.

With an open mind, you will be openhearted.

Being openhearted, you will act royally.

Being royal, you will attain the divine.

Being divine, you will be at one with the Tao.

Being at one with the Tao is eternal.

And though the body dies, the Tao will never pass away.

I try my best to be in an extreme emptiness of mind;

I try to keep myself in a state of stillness.

From the vigorous growth of all things I perceive the way they move in endless cycles.

All things, full of vitality,

Finally return to their own roots.

Returning to roots means stillness,

Also means a return to destiny.

A return to destiny is known as the law of eternity.

To understand the law is known as enlightening.

He who is ignorant of the law, if acting rashly,

Will be in great trouble.

But he who knows the law is tolerant,

And the tolerance leads to impartiality;

Impartiality to thoroughness;

Thoroughness to nature;

Nature to the Tao;

The Tao to eternity.

Thus he will not be endangered all his life.

Attain the utmost emptiness,

Hold fast to stillness.

The ten thousand things rise together;

I see them return.

All things flourish;

Each reverts to its root.

Reverting to the root is called stillness.

It means submission to fate.

Submission to fate is called [submission to] the constant.

To know the constant is called enlightenment.

If you do not know the constant,

You act blindly, ruining yourself.

Knowing the constant, you will be all-embracing.

All-embracing, hence impartial;

Impartial, hence king;

King, hence Heaven;

Heaven, hence Tao;

Tao, hence long-lasting.

Thus, you will be free of danger until the end of your life.

I strenuously try to banish all errant thoughts from my mind, and assiduously attempt to maintain quietude.

Henceforth, while everything continues to develop and evolve, I silently watch its natural transformation.

Although there are multifarious things in the world,

Each and every one will go back to where it came from.

Returning back to where it came from is called 'jing'.

It is also called 'back to destiny'.

'Back to destiny' is the eternal law.

You have insightful wisdom if you understand this eternal law.

Unable to grasp this will bring about calamity.

Knowing this, you will have great understanding.

Having great understanding will make you impartial.

Being impartial, you generally facilitate others to fulfil their potential. (accomplishment)

Accomplishment is in accordance with the law of nature.

The law of nature is called Dao.

Dao is everlasting.

Following the way of Dao, your whole life will be free from danger.

Return to the Root

Kuei Ken

Empty the mind to the utmost extent.

Maintain quiescence with the whole being.

The ten thousand things are growing with one impulse,

Yet I can discern their cyclic return.

Luxuriant indeed are the growing things;

Yet each again will return to the root.

Returning to the root means quiescence;

Quiescence means renewal of life;

Renewal of life means in tune with the Immutable.

Knowing the Immutable brings enlightenment.

Not knowing the Immutable causes disaster.

Knowing the Immutable, one will be broad-minded;

Being broad-minded, one will be impartial;

Being impartial, one will be kingly;

Being kingly, one will attain the Divine;

Attaining the Divine, one will merge with Tao,

And become immortal and imperishable,

Even after the disappearance of the body.

Seek to attain to absolute emptiness;

Maintain a state of perfect stillness.

See how all things come into being,

And see how they return!

They come to flower and fullness

And then go back to the roots whence they came.

To go home to the root is to achieve perfect stillness.

Thus, in attaining stillness, do they fulfil their destiny;

And thus, in turning back, they join the Never-changing.

To be aware of the Never-changing is to be enlightened.

Not to know the Never-changing is to stumble blindly into miseries.

He who knows the Never-changing embraces all;

Embracing all, shall he not accept all impartially?

To be impartial is an attribute of kingship,

And kingship is of Heaven.

He who is of Heaven can attain to the Tao.

He who is of the Tao endures forever,

And though his body decay, he never dies.

Attain utmost emptiness;

Hold firm to stillness.

The ten thousand things stir about;

I only watch for their going back.

Things flourish,

But each returns to its root.

Returning to the root is peace

And peace is going back to reality.

To go back to reality is to be constant.

To know the constant is to find insight;

Not to know the constant is to court calamity.

To know the constant is to be broad.

To be broad is to be just.

To be just is to be manly.

To be manly is to be heavenly.

To be heavenly is to find Tao.

To find Tao is to live forever

And to rob danger from death.

Attain the utmost unoccupiedness.

Maintain the utmost stillness,

and do not interfere with all the things that rush together in activity and grow luxuriantly.

Then you can see how living things flourish and renew themselves.

Yet, they all must return to the root again, each to its simple source.

Knowing to return to the root is to be refreshed.

This is called subtle revitalization.

To restore one's vitality is to constantly renew oneself.

To know constant renewal is to have achieved clarity.

If one does not know constant self renewal and thus acts foolishly,

disaster will soon occur.

Knowing constancy in renewing oneself,

one can extend the duration of one's life.

If one can deeply understand the extension of life's duration,

one is able to contain all things within oneself.

To be all-inclusive is to be impartial.

To be impartial is to realize the positive, creative virtues of Heaven.

To be Heavenly is to be one with the subtle essence of the universe.

To be one with the subtle essence of the universe is to enjoy everlasting life.

Such a one will be preserved, even after the dissolution of his physical body.

XVI.

Returning
to the Root

Bring
to its full effectiveness the state of vacancy,

Guard
with unwearied watchfulness the stillness of the breast,

All
things alike go through their stages of activity,

And
then return again to their primordial state of rest.

Luxuriant
vegetation blooms around on every hand,

But
to its root returns again, where er it may extend,

As
though its growth had traveled forth at some supreme command,

And,
returning home to stillness, had thus fulfilled its end.

These
returnings of command are eternal in their course,

To
know of the eternal is called enlightenment,

To
know not the eternal of confusion is the source,

And
so awakens wickedness, and evil discontent.

To
know brings comprehension and a great capacity,

A
breadth of comprehension brings a kingliness of way,

The
king-like grows to heaven-like, like Tao it comes to be,

Everlasting,
though the body perish and decay.

To arrive at ultimate quietness

Steadfastly maintain repose.

All creatures together have form;

I see them return again to their root.

The Master creatures come to perfect form,

Continuously they return to their root.

Continuous return to the root is called repose,

Repose is called the law of return,

The law of return is called eternity.

To know eternity is called illumination.

To ignore eternity is to draw misfortune on oneself,

To know eternity is to be great of Soul,

To be great of soul is to be a ruler,

To be a ruler is to be greater than all,

To be greater than all is to be conscious of Life,

To be conscious of Life is to endure.

The body shall disappear but not decay.

Achieve
the utmost Emptiness.

Cling
single-heartedly to

interior
peace.

Become
a part

of
all things,

In
this way

see
the pattern.

Flourish
they do,

Each
of them will

return
to its root.

To
return to

the
root is

to
find peace.

To
find peace is

to
fulfill one's destiny.

To
fulfill one's destiny is

to
be unchanging.

To
know the Unchanging is

called
Insight.

If
one does not

know
the Unchanging,

One
runs blindly

into
disasters.

If
one knows

the
Unchanging,

One
can understand and

embrace
all.

If
one understands and

embraces
all,

One
is capable of

doing
justice.

To
be just is

to
be a leader;

To
be a leader is

to
be one with nature;

To
be one with nature is

to
be one with the Tao (the Laws of the Universe);

To
be one with

the
Tao (the Laws of the Universe) is to become immortal.

Such
a one will be safe and whole,

Even
after the death of body.

The
Tao does not decay.

Attaining the utmost vacuity and earnestly observing quietness, while the ten thousand things all together are operating, I thus contemplate their return (to nothingness).

Indeed, things flourish luxuriantly, each to return again to the root (from which it sprang). To return to the root is called stillness; this may be described as surrendering one's trust.

Surrendering one's trust is called the constant (law). He who knows this constant (law), is called enlightened. He who does not know this constant (law), is foolishly active and comes to grief. He who knows this constant (law) forbears; forbeairng, he is unprejudiced; unprejudiced, he is all-embracing; all-embracing, he is great; great, he (knows) the Way; (knowing) the Way, he lasts; until the end of his life he is not in peril.

The (state of) vacancy should be brought to the utmost degree,

and that of stillness guarded with unwearying vigour. All things

alike go through their processes of activity, and (then) we see them

return (to their original state). When things (in the vegetable

world) have displayed their luxuriant growth, we see each of them

return to its root. This returning to their root is what we call the

state of stillness; and that stillness may be called a reporting that

they have fulfilled their appointed end.

The
report of that fulfilment is the regular, unchanging rule. To

know that unchanging rule is to be intelligent; not to know it leads

to wild movements and evil issues. The knowledge of that unchanging

rule produces a (grand) capacity and forbearance, and that capacity

and forbearance lead to a community (of feeling with all things).

From this community of feeling comes a kingliness of character; and he

who is king-like goes on to be heaven-like. In that likeness to

heaven he possesses the Tao. Possessed of the Tao, he endures long;

and to the end of his bodily life, is exempt from all danger of decay.

Attain utmost emptiness; practice utter stillness.
The
myriad creatures arise paired together;
thus Egos observe their Resurrection.

Heaven's
creatures abound,
but each returns to it's roots, which is utter stillness.

This is called 'Karmic Reward.'
Karmic
Reward is perpetual-
to know the perpetual is to be enlightened;
not
to know the perpetual is to be 'reckless.'
Recklessness breeds 'Wrong.'
To
know the perpetual is to be tolerant-
tolerance leads to Hieratic FAIRNESS;

Hieratic Fairness leads to Royal Monism,
Royal Monism, to Heaven,

Heaven, to THOU,
THOU to everlastingness.
Throughout
ones days, one may remain unimperiled.

See
that you are emptiness

Always quiet and at peace

You're in the place where all begins

The space where all things cease

All
things arise and have their day

And then go back to the single source

Returning to serenity

With no regret and no remorse

When
you see the source within

You only give assent

You see you're everlasting

And eternally omnificent

ATTAIN to utmost Emptiness.

Cling single-heartedly to interior peace.

While all things are stirring together,

I only contemplate the Return.

For flourishing as they do,

Each of them will return to its root.

To return to the root is to find peace.

To find peace is to fulfill one's destiny.

To fulfill one's destiny is to be constant.

To know the Constant is called Insight.

If one does not know the Constant,

One runs blindly into disasters.

If one knows the Constant,

One can understand and embrace all.

If one understands and embraces all,

One is capable of doing justice.

To be just is to be kingly;

To be kingly is to be heavenly;

To be heavenly is to be one with the Tao;

To be one with the Tao is to abide forever.

Such a one will be safe and whole

Even after the dissolution of his body.

Empty the self completely; Embrace perfect peace.

Realize that all beings alike go through their processes of activity and life,

and then they return to the original source.

Returning to the source brings peacefulness and stillness.

This stillness is the flow of nature, and signifies that the beings have lived their allotted span of life.

Accepting this brings enlightenment and tranquility,

ignoring this brings confusion and sorrow

If one can accept this flow of nature; one can cherish all things.

Being all-cherishing you become impartial;

Being impartial you become magnanimous;

Being magnanimous you become natural;

Being natural you become one with The Way;

Being one with The Way you become immortal:

Though the body will decay, the Way will not.

If you can empty your mind of all thoughts

your heart will embrace the tranquility of peace.

Watch the workings of all of creation,

but contemplate their return to the source.

All
creatures in the universe

return to the point where they began.

Returning to the source is tranquility

because we submit to Heavens mandate.

Returning
to Heavens mandate is called being constant.

Knowing the constant is called 'enlightenment'.

Not knowing the constant is the source of evil deeds

because we have no roots.

By knowing the constant we can accept things as they are.

By accepting things as they are, we become impartial.

By being impartial, we become one with Heaven.

By being one with Heaven, we become one with Tao.

Being one with Tao, we are no longer concerned about

losing our life because we know the Tao is constant

and we are one with Tao.

To become more profound, give up your selfishness. Let go of your efforts to be perfect or rich or secure or admired. Such efforts only limit you. They block your universality.

Letting go is like dying. Everything emerges, becomes formed, and dies. You, too.

When you die, you give up selfishness. You become one with everything else.

My deeper self knows that I am one with everything else anyway. All creation is a single whole which works according to a single principle.

I let my selfishness go and give up the illusion of being separate. I act in behalf of the whole. I benefit me and I benefit you. I am at odds with no one. I am at peace, and have energy to spare, because I am not resisting what is happening.

Death is not frightening, because I know how to let go, and I know the nature of the Eternal.

If you can empty yourself of everything,

You will have lasting peace.

Things arise, but I contemplate their return.

Things flourish and grow, and then return to their Source.

To return to the Source is to know perfect peace.

I call this a return to Life.

Returning to Life is a Universa Constant. Knowing this is illuminating.

Someone who doesn't understand this is in error

and may act dangerously.

But knowing this Constant, you can embrace All things.

Embracing All things, you can treat them fairly. Treating them fairly,

you are noble.

Being noble, you are like the cosmos.

If you are like the cosmos, you are like the Tao.

If you are like the Tao, you will have eterna life,

and you needn't be afraid of dying.

Contemplate
Infinity and become peaceful as the

mind becomes lost.

The
self perceives the never ending

manifestations of

the potential of Infinity as well as the

disintegration

of all those manifestations.

Within
Infinity all things manifest

and disintegrate.

Disintegration
is a returning to the Infinite

potential.

Disintegration is the destiny of all

manifestations.

Manifesting is the nature of Infinity.

Change is the Infinite constant.

Acknowledging
change is the key to understanding

the harmony of never ending change.

Acknowledging
change within the Infinite potential

of which every creature is a manifestation,

unique, yet bound to all things in

disintegration,

gives one a perspective regarding life.

Possessing
perspective, one becomes impartial,

openhearted, tolerant, compassionate

and indifferent to judging others.

These are foundations of harmony.

The
manifestation of the body disintegrates

but Infinity can never disintegrate into

itself.

There
is nothing to fear.

Let emptiness prevail.

Maintain deep silence.

All things arise.

I can observe their return.

They flourish, then each returns to its center,

returns to its unchanging center.

This implies a return to life.

A return to life is the Norm.

To know the Norm leads to understanding.

To ignore the Norm is absurd, and leads to disaster.

To know the Norm is Tolerance.

Tolerance is Justice.

To be Just is to rule.

Sovereignty comes from Heaven.

Heaven is the Way.

The Way is eternal.

The disappearance of the body is not to be feared.

Become completely empty.

Hold firm to stillness.

The Ten Thousand Things come to life, then return whence they came:

They increase and flourish, but each returns to its source.

Returning to the source is stillness; it is what is destined.

What is destined is unchanging.

To know what is unchanging is to have insight;

Being ignorant of what is unchanging leads to misfortune.

He who knows what is unchanging will be impartial.

He who is impartial will act justly.

He who acts justly is like a good ruler.

He who is a good ruler is in accord with Heaven.

He who is in accord with Heaven is in accord with the Tao.

He who is in accord with the Tao is everlasting;

And to the end of his days, he will meet with no danger.

When one is extremely stilled and free of vain desires,

All things will work together

So that one can watch the changes,

For all things return to their roots:

Their original states without poles.

Returning is completing the cycle of life's work.

The cycling of life is absolute,

Awareness of that absoluteness is wisdom.

Without that wisdom, one may do things willfully

And may hence meet with an early death.

With the wisdom, one can be tolerant.

Being tolerant, one can be just to everything.

Being just, one can be a wise leader,

Being a wise leader, one can fulfill the greatest cause.

Being able to fulfill, one is serving the Way.

By serving the Way, the cause can last,

And will not vanish even after one's death.

Push Emptiness to the limit, watch over Stillness very firmly.

The thousands of things all around are active - I give my attention to Turning Back. Things growing wild as weeds all turn back to the Root.

To turn back to The Root is called Stillness. This is 'reporting in' 'reporting in' is becoming Steady. Experiencing Steadiness is Clarity. Not to experience Steadiness is to be heedless in one's actions - bad luck.

Experiencing Steadiness, then one is all-embracing all-embracing, then an impartial Prince Prince, then King King, then Heaven Heaven, then Tao

Tao then one lasts very long. As to destroying the self, there will be nothing to fear.

Make emptiness* in yourself complete and achieve the full calm! Let everything around move by itself. Let everyone bloom spiritually and advance to cognition of their true Essence**.

Those who cognized their true Essence — achieve full calm. Thus they attain the common Abode of All Who Attained***.

One's being in this Abode has to become constant. He, who fulfilled this, is called Enlightened, Perfect, possessing the Higher Wisdom.

Those Who attained that Abode represent the United "We" which is the Highest Ruler. That Abode is also called the Sky****. This is the Abode of the Eternal Tao.

Tao is non-corporeal. It cannot be caught by anyone. Thus, It is invincible.

* Here it means meditative Nirvanic state of Nirodhi. In this state, the individual "I" completely disappears, dissolves in Tao.

** Atman, Higher Self, Tao.

*** The Abode of the Creator.

**** Or Heaven.

Without wishes tranquillity is obtained.

Everything in existence,

One day is absorbed in non-existence.

What has a vigorous grows,

Eventually returns to the source.

The union with the origin is tranquillity,

That is the natural condition of things and the eternity.

He
who knows this is enlightened.

He who doesn't know will suffer.

Knowing what eternity is, he is united with everything.

United with everything, he will expend.

Expending, he is everywhere.

Being everywhere a high state of awareness is obtained.

Through high awareness he is on the Tao Way.

On the Tao Way eternity is reached.

Although the body can decay and die,

His spirit is eternal.

Promote
the heights of vacuity. Preserve the wholesomeness of tranquility. The myriad
creatures arise side by side and [prepared by having maintained vacuity and
tranquility] I observe their recapitulations. For these creatures in profusion
each return once more to their root. To return to the root is called tranquility,
which in turn is called submitting again to Heaven's mandate. Returning to Heaven's
mandate is called being constant. Knowing the constant is called enlightenment.
Should one not know the constant, one would wantonly commit evil deeds. By knowing
the constant one can accept. By accepting one is impartial. By being impartial
one is kingly. By being kingly one is in concord with Heaven. By being in concord
with Heaven one is on the Dao. By being on the Dao one is long-lasting, and
even though one should lose one's body one would not be endangered.

Attain the ultimate emptiness;

Maintain the absolute tranquility.

All things rise together.

And I observe their return ...

The multitude of all things return each to their origin.

To return to the origin means repose;

It means return to their destiny.

To return to their destiny means eternity;

To know eternity means enlightenment.

Not knowing eternity is to do evil things blindly.

To know eternity means having capacity.

Capacity leads to justice.

Justice leads to kingship.

Kingship leads to Heaven.

Heaven leads to Tao.

Tao is everlasting.

Thus the entire life will be without danger.

Knowing the Absolute

Attain the highest openness;

Maintain the deepest harmony.

Become a part of All Things;

In this way, I perceive the cycles.

Indeed, things are numerous;

But each cycle merges with teh source.

Merging with the source is called harmonizing;

This is known as the cycle of destiny.

The cycle of desitny is called the Absolute;

Knowing the Absolute is called insight.

To not know the Absolute

Is to recklessly become a part of misfortune.

To know the Absolute is to be tolerant.

What is tolerant becomes impartial;

What is impartial becomes powerful;

What is powerful becomes natural;

What is natural becomes Tao.

What has Tao becomes everlasting

And free from harm throughout life.

From whence everything came, it returns. And it is to one source that everything is. The wonder of the Dao exists in the wisest sage and in the newborn baby. Those that do not see this fill their life with ever-seeking sadness. Those that can see it awake with a smile to greet the day and a smile to great the end.

Touch ultimate emptiness,

Hold steady and still.

All
things work together:

I have watched them reverting,

And have seen how they flourish

And return again, each to his roots.

This,
I say, is the stillness:

A retreat to one's roots;

Or better yet, return

To the will of God,

Which is, I say, to constancy.

The knowledge of constancy

I call enlightenment and say

That not to know it

Is blindness that works evil.

But
when you know

What eternally is so,

You have stature

And stature means righteousness

And righteousness is kingly

And kingliness divine

And divinity is the Way

Which is final.

Then,
though you die,

You shall not perish.

Try the utmost to make the heart vacant,

Be sure to hold fast to quietude.

All things are growing and developing,

And I see thereby their cycles.

Though all things flourish with a myriad of variations,

Each one will eventually return to its roots.

This return to its root means "tranquility,"

It is called "returning to its destiny."

"To return to its destiny" is called "the eternal,"

To know "the eternal" is called "enlightenment."

Not to know "the eternal" and to act blindly (will necessarily) result in disaster.

Only knowing "the eternal" can one embrace all,

Only embracing all can one be impartial.

Being impartial means you can be all-encompassing under Heaven,

By being all-encompassing under Heaven, you can be one with Nature.

Being one with Nature is in accord with Tao,

Being in accord with Tao is everlasting,

And so you can be free from danger throughout your life.

Their attainment of emptiness absolute and their maintenance of quietude guileless,

The myriad things interact.

I, as such, observe their return.

All things flourish, but each reverts to its roots.

To return to the root is called "quietude," which means to revert to one's destiny, and reversion to one's destiny is called "constancy."

To understand constancy is called "perspicacity."

Not to understand constancy results in errant behavior and, with it, misfortune.

To understand constancy is to embrace all things.

To embrace things is to be impartial.

Such impartiality means true kingship.

With true kingship, he is one with Heaven.

To be one with Heaven means to be one with the Dao.

To be one with the Dao is to be everlasting.

As long as he lives, no danger shall befall him.

1. Take emptiness to the limit;

2. Maintain tranquility in the center.

3.
The ten thousand things—side-by-side they arise;

4. And by this I see their return.

5. Things [come forth] in great numbers;

6. Each one returns to its root.

7. This is called tranquility.

8. "Tranquility"—This means to return to your fate.

9. To return to your fate is to be constant;

10. To know the constant is to be wise.

11. Not to know the constant is to be reckless and wild;

12. If you're reckless and wild, your actions will lead to misfortune.

13.
To know the constant is to be all-embracing;

14. To be all-embracing is to be impartial;

15. To be impartial is to be kingly;

16. To be kingly is to be [like] Heaven;

17. To be [like] Heaven is to be [one with] the Dao;

18. If you're [one with] the Dao, to the end of your days you'll suffer no harm.

Clear your head.

Stay calm.

Watch as everything happens around you.

Everything reverts
to its original state, which was nothing.

And whenever something becomes nothing,

it gets right with Tao.

If you don't
understand that,

you're going to screw up somewhere down the line.

If you figure it out,

you'll always know what to do.

If you get right
with Tao,

you won't be afraid to die,

because you know you will.

.

Know the Eternal

Empty yourself of everything.

Maintain a steady serenity.

All things take shape and become active,

but I see them return to their source,

like vegetation that grows and flourishes,

but returns to the root from which it springs.

Returning to the source is serenity;

it is to realize one's destiny.

To realize one's destiny is to know the eternal.

To know the eternal is to be enlightened.

Not to know the eternal

is to act blindly and court disaster.

Whoever knows the eternal is open to everything.

Whoever is open to everything is impartial.

To be impartial is to be universal.

To be universal is to be in accord with heaven.

To be in accord with heaven is to be in accord with the Way.

To be in accord with the Way is to be eternal

and to live free from harm even though the body dies.

Emptied of all I-ness you rest in the silent primordial ground of the Self.

Everything living swells to unfoldment

All beings move through change decay and return and disbecoming turn back to their root.

Turning back to their root means return to rest resting means going home to one's destination fulfilling one's destination means becoming aware of one's permanence becoming aware of one's permanence means to be enlightened.

Being enlightened about one's Self means to remain in the cycle of ignorance and subjection to grief.

One who becomes aware of his permanence is wise.

Wise he is just.

Just he is serene.

Serene he is of a heavenly nature.

Of a heavenly nature he is united with Tao.

United with Tao he is eternal.

Thus the circle closes.

Sure of the eternity of his Self the loss of his body leaves him serene.

Seek The Extremity of The Void

Lao Tze says,

Whoever seeks the extremity of the void will preserve genuine stillness.

When all existence alike goes through the process of transformation, it returns to its original state.

All existence is prosperous as prosperous flowers and leaves which finally decay and return to their roots.

This returning to their roots is what we call the action of being still;

and the action of being still is a response to the rule of relapsing to one's origin.

The rule of relapsing to one's origin is the absolute, the unchanging rule.

To know that unchanging rule is to be enlightened;

to know not the absolute rule leads to haphazard action and evil issues.

The knowledge of the absolute and the unchanging rule produces the capacity of inclusiveness, and the capacity of inclusiveness produces the character of justice.

The character of justice goes on to become the king-like character.

And the king-like character goes on to become the heaven-like character.

In that likeness to heaven, such character possesses the Tao.

He who possesses the Tao endures for a long time, and the end of his corporeal life is exempt from all danger of decay.

RETURNING TO THE ROOT

It
is only by means of being

that non-being may be found.

When
society changes

from its natural state of flux,

to that which seems like chaos,

the inner world of the superior man

remains uncluttered and at peace.

By remaining still, his self detatched,

he aids society in its return

to the way of nature and of peace.

The value of his insight may be clearly seen

when chaos ceases.

Being
one with the Tao is to be at peace,

and to be in conflict with it,

leads to chaos and dysfunction.

When
the consistency of the Tao is known,

the mind is receptive to its states of change.

It
is by being at one with the Tao,

that the sage holds no prejudice

against his fellow man.

If accepted as a leader of men,

he is held in high esteem.

Throughout
his life,

both being and non-being,

the Tao protects him.

Empty your mind of all thoughts.

Let your heart be at peace.

Watch the turmoil of beings,

but contemplate their return.

Each separate being in the universe

returns to the common source.

Returning to the source is serenity.

If you don't realize the source,

you stumble in confusion and sorrow.

When you realize where you come from,

you naturally become tolerant,

disinterested, amused,

kindhearted as a grandmother,

dignified as a king.

Immersed in the wonder of the Tao,

you can deal with whatever life brings you,

and when death comes, you are ready.

To have the greatest capacity of mind, keep it quiet and patient,

All things are resolved in order,

In order to understand the merit of Return.

While individual things are growing simultaneously yet all of them will return eventually to the original root (Pure Matter).

To return toward the original root is to see the static phenomenon.

To see the static phenomenon is to know the original order.

To know the original order is to know the eternal law.

If one does not know the eternal law and acts only by means of trial and error he will end in disaster.

By knowing the eternal law one can have capacity;

by having capacity one can be impartial;

by being impartial one can be perfect;

being perfect one can be superior;

by being superior one can be eternal;

and by being eternal one can approach Dao.

There will be no discontinuation of life, even though a human body will die.

Reaching the ultimate emptiness,

Concentrating on the central stillness,

All things work together.

From this I observe their returning.

All things under heaven flourish in their vitality,

Yet each returns to its own root.

This is stillness.

Stillness means returning to its destiny.

Returning to its destiny is steadfastness.

To know steadfastness means enlightenment.

Not to know steadfastness is to act forcefully.

Acting forcefully brings disaster.

Knowing the steadfast implies acceptance.

Acceptance is impartial.

Impartial is regal.

Regal is heaven.

Heaven is Tao.

Tao is beyond danger even when the body perishes.

XVI

Be
completely empty; be tranquil to the core

The
creatures of the world are all born

And by this I see their deaths

Things pour forth from the earth and each returns to it

Know this and you know tranquility, for your own fate is clear

See what is, accept it, and you are free of all burdens

No
good can come from rejecting this

Without such burdens you have no prejudice

Without prejudice you give to all equally and fully

Giving equally and fully is a step along the way

And being so, you will fear nothing to the end of your days

Attain the Climax of Emptiness

Attain the climax of emptiness,

preserve the utmost quiet:

as myriad things act in concert,

I thereby observe the return.

Things flourish,

then each returns to its root.

Returning to the root is called stillness:

stillness is called return to Life,

return to Life is called the constant;

knowing the constant is called enlightenment.

Acts at random, in ignorance of the constant, bode ill.

Knowing the constant gives perspective;

this perspective is impartial.

Impartiality is the highest nobility;

the highest nobility is divine,

and the divine is the Way.

This Way is everlasting,

not endangered by physical death.

Without slightest prejudice and being extremely concentrated, one can handle the complex matters even they happen in parallel.

Various things have their roots.

When the root is found, we reach the goal.

This is the law of the nature, i.e. the nature of the universe.

It is wise to know the law of the nature.

Without the knowing it and act blindly would doom to fail.

Knowing the Tao makes people open-minded.

Open-mindedness leads to completeness.

Completeness is conformed to the nature.

Conforming to nature is Tao.

Tao means long-lasting.

Therefore, those who know Tao would be always successful.

Attain to utmost emptiness.

Cling single-heartedly to stillness.

While all things are stirring together, I only contemplate the return; all things flourish, but each of them will return to its root.

To return to the root is to be still; that is to return to one's destiny.

To return to one's destiny is to return to the constant Way.

To know the constant Way is called enlightenment.

If one does not know the constant Way, one is blind and runs into disasters.

If one knows the constant Way, one is all-embracing.

If one is all-embracing, one is just.

To be just is to be king.

King is Heaven.

Heaven is the Way.

The Way is eternal.

It is safe all life.

Reach the emptiness.

Keep the stillness.

Everything rises and falls, watch this cycle.

Grow and flourish, return with seeds.

Returning seeds is stillness (no mutation), is self-similarity.

Self-similarity is the Way (invariance).

Knowing the Way is insight.

Not knowing the Way leads to disaster.

Knowing the Way, encompasses.

Being encompass, could be just.

Being just, could be a ruler.

Being a ruler, could benefit the world the same as the Tien does.

Tien is Tao. The Tao is eternal.

Though the body dies, the spirit lives forever more.

Empty everything out;

hold fast to your stillness.

Even though all things are stirring together,

watch for the movement of return.

The ten thousand things flourish and then

each returns to the root from which it came.

Returning to the root is stillness.

Through stillness each fulfills its destiny.

That which has fulfilled its destiny

becomes part of the Always-so.

To be aware of the Always-so is to awaken.

Those
who innovate while in ignorance of the Always-so

move toward disaster.

Those who act wirh awareness of the Always-so

embrace all, are not possessed by particular desire

and move toward the Tao.

Those who are at one with the Tao abide forever.

Even after their bodies waste away,

they are safe and whole.

Sit
next to the void

become empty

quiet and still

at peace.

Years go by

you contemplate your return.

You see the years,

they shrink and return.

Everything returns to its origin.

This return to origin is called stillness;

stillness is called accepting the natural laws of the universe.

Accepting the way of the universe

is enlightenment.

Not
to know the nature of the universe is to wander aimlessly.

Knowing, one has room for everyone and everything.

Having room for all, one is without prejudice.

Without prejudice, one can be a leader.

To lead is to be of the earth.

To be of the earth is to be one with nature.

Being
one with nature

is to be transformed.

Though the body falls

nothing is destroyed.

Attain complete humility towards the void;

hold firm to the basis of quietude.

The myriad things take shape and rise to activity,

Now, I watch them fall, worked on,

back to their repose and roots

like plants that flourish

but return to the soil and root they grew from.

To
return to the root is basic repose;

it's quiet and returning to some destiny.

To submit to a destiny is to find the eternal shelter, the always-so, or the
eternal dao.

To know the eternal always-so is to be somewhat illumined.

not to know it courts disaster.

He
who knows the eternal shelter has room in him for nearly everything - he is
wide as tolerant.

Being much including, there's little prejudice;

to be without blunt prejudice is kingly;

to be kingly is to be well in accord with nature; it's to be of heaven.

To be of heaven in unison with an undaunted nature is to be in dao;

This dao is forever, and he that owns it, is hardly destroyed, even though his
body ceases.

Attain utmost emptiness,

Maintain utter stillness.

The myriad creatures arise side by side, thus I observe their renewal.

Heaven's creatures abound,

but each returns to its roots, which is called "stillness."

This is termed "renewal of fate."

Renewal of fate is perpetual -

To know the perpetual is to be enlightened;

Not to know the perpetual is to be reckless - recklessness breeds evil.

To know the perpetual is to be tolerant -

tolerance leads to ducal impartiality,

ducal impartiality to kingliness,

kingliness to heaven,

heaven to the Way,

the Way to permanence.

To the end of his days,

he will not be imperiled.

Having emptied yourself of everything, remain where you are.

All things spring forth into activity with one accord, and wither do we see them return?

After blossoming for a while, everything dies down to its root.

This going back to one's origin is called peace: it is the giving of oneself over to the inevitable.

This giving of oneself over to the inevitable is called preservation.

He who knows this preservation is called enlightened.

He who knows it not continues in misery.

He who knows this preservation is great of soul.

He who is great of soul is prevailing.

Prevailing, he is a king.

Being a king, he is celestial.

Being celestial, he is of Tao.

Being of Tao, he endures for ever: for though his body perish, yet he suffers no hurt.

Confidence

Your relationship begins with the Tao

and returns to the Tao.

Therefore you may watch it unfold

with confidence.

Beginning and ending,

searching and finding,

living and dying,

are all part of the Tao.

If you look deeply you will discover

that loss is not the final word.

Fear often appears either

as a lashing out

or as withdrawal.

The next time you do either of these

think,

"What am I afraid of?"

This is the real issue.

When this issue is shared,

confidence returns.

Attain complete vacuity. Maintain steadfast quietude.

All things come into being, And I see thereby their return. All things flourish, But each one returns to its root.

This return to its root means tranquillity. It is called returning to
its destiny. To return to destiny is called the eternal (Tao). To know
the eternal is called enlightenment. Not to know the eternal is to act
blindly to result in disaster.

He who knows the eternal is all-embracing. Being all-embracing, he is
impartial. Being impartial, he is kingly (universal). Being kingly, he
is one with Nature. Being one with Nature, he is in accord with Tao.

Being in accord with Tao, he is everlasting And is free from danger throughout his lifetime.

Be utterly humble

And you shall hold to the foundation of peace.

Be at one with all these living things which, having arisen and flourished,

Return to the quiet whence they came,

Like a healthy growth of vegetation

Falling back upon the root.

Acceptance of this return to the root has been called 'quietism,'

Acceptance of quietism has been condemned as 'fatalism.'

But fatalism is acceptance of destiny

And to accept destiny is to face life with open eyes,

Whereas not to accept destiny is to face death blindfold.

He who is open-eyed is open-minded-

He who is open-minded is open-hearted,

He who is open-hearted is kingly,

He who is kingly is godly,

He who is godly is useful,

He who is useful is infinite,

He who is infinite is immune,

He who is immune is immortal.

Be humble to the utmost and be peaceful wholeheartedly.

Everything in the world is functioning, and I see the cycle of life and death.

Everything in the world will eventually go back to the root.

Going back to the root means peace, or going to destiny.

Going to destiny means following nature's way.

Understanding nature's way makes your mind clear.

If you do not understand nature's way and you violate it,

You will meet with disaster.

Understanding nature's way makes you tolerant;

Tolerance makes you fair,

Fairness makes you a good ruler,

Being a good ruler makes you conform to nature,

Conformity with nature leads you to the DAO.

The DAO lets you last long and never be defeated in your lifetime.

Attain utmost emptiness,

Maintain utter stillness.

Then, as ten thousand things arise together,

One will witness their returning to the source.

Though things abound in the universe,

They all return to the source.

Returning to the source is called stillness,

And stillness is called returning to destiny.

To return to destiny is to return to eternity,

And to know eternity is called enlightenment.

To act unawarely in the nescience of eternity

Is to bring disaster to your life.

To know eternity is to be all-inclusive,

To be all-inclusive is to be impartial,

To be impartial is to attain self-mastery,

To attain self-mastery is to be Heavenly,

And to be Heavenly is to be one with the Tao Eternal.

To be one with the Tao Eternal is to enjoy everlasting life,

Forever secure even after the enfolding of the physical self.

When one is extremely stilled and free of vain desires,

All things will work together

So that one can watch the changes,

For all things return to their roots:

Their original states without poles.

Returning is completing the cycle of life's work.

The cycling of life is absolute,

Awareness of that absoluteness is wisdom.

Without that wisdom, one may do things willfully

And may hence meet with an early death.

With the wisdom, one can be tolerant.

Being tolerant, one can be just to everything.

Being just, one can be a wise leader,

Being a wise leader, one can fulfill the greatest cause.

Being able to fulfill, one is serving the Way.

By serving the Way, the cause can last,

And will not vanish even after one's death.

Empty the self completely; Embrace perfect peace.

Realize that all beings alike go through their processes of activity and life,

and then they return to the original source.

Returning to the source brings peacefulness and stillness.

This stillness is the flow of nature, and signifies that the beings have lived their allotted span of life.

Accepting this brings enlightenment and tranquility,

ignoring this brings confusion and sorrow

If one can accept this flow of nature; one can cherish all things.

Being all-cherishing you become impartial;

Being impartial you become magnanimous;

Being magnanimous you become natural;

Being natural you become one with The Way;

Being one with The Way you become immortal:

Though the body will decay, the Way will not.

