===== Chapter 81 =====

Sincere speech is not pleasing.

Pleasing speech is not sincere.

Those who are good do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who understand are not broadly learned.

Those who are broadly learned do not understand.

The sages do not accumulate.

Already, by means of doing for people

They have more and more for themselves.

Already, by means of giving to people

They have more and more—too much—for themselves.

The Way of Heaven is to benefit and not to harm.

The Way of sages is to do but not to struggle.

This translation or excerpts from it may be freely reproduced for non-commercial purposes.

© Aalar Fex, 2006

[
]

Sincere words and not pretty. Pretty words are not sincere.

Good people do not quarrel. Quarrelsome people are not good.

The wise are not learned. The learned are not wise.

The Sage is not acquisitive - Has enough By doing for others, Has even more By giving to others.

Heaven's Tao Benefits and does not harm. The Sage's Tao Acts and does not contend.

True words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not true.

Good people do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who know are not learned.

The learned do not know.

The sage accumulates nothing.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the more he receives.

The Tao of heaven

Is to benefit, not harm.

The Tao of the sage

Is to act for others, not to contend with them.

[
]

IN CONCLUSION

Truthful words are rarely pleasant and fine sounding.

Pleasant and fine sounding words are rarely truthful.

The good need not prove by argument.

To prove by argument is rarely good.

True wisdom rarely springs from learning.

Learning rarely is indicative of true wisdom.

The sage need never hoard.

Doing more for others, The more he gains.

Giving more to others, The greater is his abundance.

The Tao of heaven benefits without injury or harm.

The Tao of the Sage accomplishes without striving or contention.

© Copyright 1997 Alan B. Taplow

First published in 1982 - ISBN 0-941758-01-X

All Rights Reserved - This complete heading must appear on all copies

Permission given to freely copy and distribute as long as not for commercial gain.

If sold for profit, permission must be obtained from:

Alan B. Taplow

844 John Fowler Road

Plainfield, VT 05667

802-454-4675

e-mail - ataplow@bigfoot.com

[
]

Believing in words is not good.

Good words are not believed.

Skillful people do not dispute.

Those who dispute are not skillful.

Knowing it is not the same as wide learning.*

Wide learning is not the same as knowing.

The sage does not hoard.

Because they work for others, they have more.

Having shared with people, they have abundance.

Heaven's Tao is sharp, and does not injure.

The sage's Tao becomes, and does not compete.

* Wide learning=Metabolizing experiences in the body

[
]

THE SHEWING-FORTH OF SIMPLICITY

True speech is not elegant; elaborate speech is not truth. Those who

know do not argue; the argumentative are without knowledge. Those who

have assimilated are not learned; those who are gross with learning have

not assimilated.

The
Wise Man doth not hoard. The more he giveth, the more he hath; the

more he watereth, the more is he watered himself.

The
Tao of Heaven is like an Arrow, yet it woundeth not; and the Wise

Man, in all his Works, maketh no contention.

Sincere words are not fine; fine words are not sincere. Those who areskilled (in the Tao) do not dispute (about it); the disputatious are notskilled in it. Those who know (the Tao) are not extensively learned; theextensively learned do not know it. The sage does not accumulate (for himself).The more that he expends for others, the more does he possess of his own;the more that he gives to others, the more does he have himself. With allthe sharpness of the Way of Heaven, it injures not; with all the doingin the way of the sage he does not strive.

[
]

True words are not pretty

Pretty words are not true

Wise men do not talk about the Unspeakable

One who talks about the Unspeakable is not wise

Wise men are not learned

And learned ones aren't wise

A wise man doesn't gather possessions

He gives what he has

And therefore he is worthy of living

He shares his wisdom with others

His wisdom is never-ending

Living according to nature never harms

The life of a wise man is unselfish and peaceful

He who is genuine is not artificial; He who is artificial is not genuine.

He who is intelligent is not quarrelsome; He who is quarrelsome is not intelligent.

He who is wise is not pretentious; He who is pretentious is not wise.

Therefore the intelligent man does not struggle to achieve for himself. The more useful he is to others, the more his needs will be cared for by those repeatedly benefited by his yielding.

Nature's way is to produce good without evil. The intelligent man's way is to accept and follow Nature rather than to oppose Nature.

True words are not fine-sounding;

Fine-sounding words are not true.

The good man does not prove by argument;

The he who proves by argument is not good.

True wisdom is different from much learning;

Much learning means little wisdom.

The Sage has no need to hoard;

When his own last scrap has been used up on behalf of others,

Lo, he has more than before!

When his own last scrap has been used up in giving to other,

Lo, his stock is even greater than before!

For heaven's way is to sharpen without cutting,

And the Sage's way is to act without striving.

Truth is not eloquent.

Eloquence is not truth.

Wise men do not try to persuade.

Whoever tries to persuade is not wise.

One who knows, claims unknowing.

One who claims knowledge, does not know.

The sage does not acquire.

He bestows what he has on others

and always has more.

The more he gives, the greater his abundance.

The way of heaven is to give without harm.

The way of the sage is to serve without striving.

True words are not embellished

Embellished words are not truthful

To be right is not to be argumentative

To be argumentative is not to be right

To be knowing is not to be sophisticated

To be sophisticated is not to be knowing

Wise ones do not accumulate

Though intending to act on behalf of another

The more they themselves have gained

Though intending to give to another

The more they themselves are increased

Heaven's way is to benefit, but without doing harm

The wise ones' way is to work, but without competition

© Bradford Hatcher, 2005

[
]

The sage

Sincere words are not showy.

showy words are not sincere.

Those who know are not "widely learned"

Those who are "widely learned" do not know.

The good do not have a lot.

Those with a lot are not good.

The sage accumulates nothing.

Having used what he had for others,

He has even more.

Having given what he had to others,

What he has is even greater.

Therefore, the way of Heaven

is to benefit and not te cause any harm;

The way of Man is to act on behalf of others

And not to compete with them.

[
]

True words aren't elaborate. Elaborate words aren't true.

Good people don't argue. People who argue aren't good.

People who know aren't full of facts. People who are full of facts don't know.

The sage doesn't hoard. She increases her treasure by working for her fellow human beings. She increases her abundance by giving herself to them.

The way of heaven: benefit all, harm none. The way of the sage: work for all, contend with none.

[
]

Words that resonate may not be eloquent,

But eloquence may never resonate.

Pure being does not argue;

Those who argue pervert pure being.

Understanding is not scholarly;

A scholar's way lacks understanding.

The Sage does not hoard its teaching:

The more it gives us,

The more it is fulfilled.

For giving is the way of true increase.

The way of Tao is benevolent:

It does not harm or punish.

The Tao brings all things to completion,

In the endless dance of its Harmony.

© Brian Donohue, M.A., 2005

[
]

Words of truth are not high-sounding;

high-sounding words are not the truth.

One who has Teh does not argue;

one who argues does not have Teh.

The truly wise do not know many things;

one who knows many things is not truly wise.

The
truly wise do not selfishly crave.

They live for other people

and thereby grow richer.

They give freely of themselves

and thereby have great abundance.

The
great Tao endows,

but does so unconditionally.

The Tao of the wise accomplishes,

but does so unselfishly.

Sincere words are not (necessarily) pleasant, nor are pleasant words (necessarily) sincere.

The good are not (necessarily) skillful debaters, not are skillful debaters (necessarily) good men.

The wise are not (necessarily) well informed, nor are the well informed (necessarily) wise.

The Holy Man does not accumulate. He works for others, yet ever has abundance for himself; he gives to others, yet himself ever possesses superabundance.

The divine way is advantageous, without danger; the way of the Sages is effective without struggle.

[
]

He who knows does not speak;

He who speaks does not know.

He who is truthful is not showy;

He who is showy is not truthful.

He who is virtuous does not dispute.

He who disputes is not virtuous.

He who is learned is not wise.

He who is wise is not learned.

Therefore the Sage does not display his own merits.

[
]

Making the Essence Clear

Accurate language is not beautiful.

Beautiful language is not accurate.

Those who are good at [things] don't distinguish.

Those who distinguish are not good at [things].

Those who know-how are not comprehensive.

Those who are comprehensive do not know how.

Sages don't accumulate.

Although they use it to deem-act "others"

Themselves increase 'having'

Although they use it to give others.

Themselves increase in magnitude.

The guide of nature: benefit and yet do not harm.

The guide of Sages: deem-act and don't dispute.

-----------------------------------------

Chad
Hansen

Laozi (Lao Tzu)

http://www.hku.hk/philodep/ch/laoency.htm

Laozi (Lao Tzu:
dates uncertain. Speculation ranges from from 600 BC to 200 BC) is, we assume,
the author of the Daode Jing (Tao Te Ching), the most beloved and widely translated
Chinese philosophical text. The figure of Laozi has always been shrouded in
mystery. It deepens the more we discover about the texts. Tradition regarded
Laozi as Confucius' (6th Century BC) teacher and the "founder" of
Daoism, the "doubt tradition" movement in modern China gave influential
arguments for dating the text to the middle "Warring States" period
(4th Century BC). The discovery of 1st Century BC version of the text suggested
the text was in flux over a long period of time. A. C. Graham argued that the
text probably became important only after Zhuangzi died (ca. 295 BC). Scholars
in China, on the contrary, have reverted to the traditional dating placing Laozi
before Confucius. Many scholars dismiss Laozi as mythological or use his name
as shorthand for "the author(s) of the Daode Jing."

The interpretation
of the text is complicated by its disputed history and, thus, is even more controversial.
There are now over 100 different translations and closer to 2000 commentaries
in Chinese. Traditional views are that Laozi inspired Zhuangzi and they together
formed a philosophical school known as "Daoism" which inspired a later
religion of the same name. Until recently, scholars mostly thought the religion
was a distortion of the philosophy, but some now argue that the text emerged
first from a religion worshipping the Yellow Emperor along with Laozi (known
as Huang-Lao).

We obviously cannot
consider all the interpretations here and our interest is more philosophical
than religious. We can justify our focus whichever historical story we tell
since, as Graham's analysis stressed, the Zhuangzi introduces Laozi into Chinese
philosophical discourse. Whatever its dates and origin, Laozi first meant to
Chinese philosophy what the school of Zhuangzi first found of interest in it.
We will look for the philosophical theory that would best justify Zhuangzi's
interest and explain the traditional genealogy. We leave open whether the religious
reading came later than the philosophical or preceded it.

We should note
that religious interpretations dominate the extant translations. They reverse
our strategy here and make the interpretation of Zhuangzi conform to the theory
that he was a religious disciple. According to this interpretation, Laozi and
later Zhuangzi had some mystical experience-an experience of the indescribable
oneness of everything. They changed the meaning of "dao" (tao) from
"guiding instructions" and used it to refer to a divine being (on
the model of Buddha or mystical creator-God).

Besides the empirically
dubious claims about the mystical experiences and the meaning change, the religious
interpretation of the text faces serious difficulties. (1) The mystical reading,
"there is a dao which language cannot describe," describes that very
dao and is incoherent on its face. Elaborating further on that dao, as religious
readings take the texts to do, is hard to motivate. (2) If we take seriously
the claim that language cannot talk about dao, it must rely on a theory of what
language can do as much as it does on the concept of the object. We can study
that philosophy of language with no threat of incoherence (especially since
ordinarily dao refers to a linguistic object-prescriptive discourse). If we
can explain the content and character of Laozi's text using its linguistic theory
alone, it will undermine any remaining motivation to postulate the mystical
experience and accuse Daoists of changing the meaning of they key term in their
critique of Confucianism.

Let us start, then,
with the historical account in The Zhuangzi. It names Shen Dao as a forerunner
of Laozi. Shen Dao's slogan was "abandon knowledge; discard self."
'Knowledge' meant knowledge of some moral dao. He used the notion of a 'Great
dao' to refer to the actual course of world history. You will follow it; you
need no knowledge of daoguides to follow the Great Dao. "Even a clod of
earth, can not miss the dao," he concluded.

The Zhuangzi account
distances both Laozi and Zhuangzi from Shen Dao. The narrator says "[Shen
Dao's] is a daoguide that can not daoguide" and characterizes it as a daoguide
for the dead, not for the living. The point is that "what will be will
be" has no implications for action. Whatever we do will accord with Great
Dao, but knowing that does not help me decide what to do. Zhuangzi implicitly
diagnosed a deeper paradox in Shen Dao's views. Since it is telling us to do
something, Shen Dao's slogan is itself a bit of guiding knowledge. So, if we
follow it, we disobey it. If we follow Shen Dao's prescription, we do what prescription
itself says not to do. Laozi, however, not only tolerated this paradox, he replicated
it.

We can understand
Laozi, then, as accepting the paradoxical "abandon knowledge" spirit
of Shen Dao, but rejecting the fatalism. Something like the Great Dao does surfaces
sporadically in the Laozi, but it is not the focus of his theory. He may have
tolerated the paradox on the grounds stated in his first line. "No daoguide
that can daoguide is a constant daoguide." Shen Dao's is a constant dao
(i.e., natural or not dependent on changeable convention) but it can not guide.
Any daoguide that can is changeable.

That famous opening
line is followed by a less noticed parallel-"Any name that can name is
not a constant name." This signals that dao denotes linguistic items-systems
of guiding discourse. Laozi is skeptical of the reliability of a discourse dao.
The skepticism rests on the conventional (hence changeable) nature of language.
No discourse-based instruction will guide reliably in all circumstances because
the terms used do not mark distinctions reliably. The contrast of the natural
and the conventional pervades the text.

How does this line
of thought lead to the "abandon knowledge" conclusion? What motivates
it is the goal of freedom from social control. Laozi treats (prescriptive) knowledge
as based on language. Accordingly, knowledge consists of arbitrary, historically
"accidental" social systems of making distinctions, guiding desires
and acting. Laozi then justifies "abandon knowledge" as a way to recover
our natural, authentic, spontaneous human impulses.

Chinese language
theories call all characters mingnames. Adjectives and common nouns alike have
a scope-they "pick out" a range of reality and exclude the rest. Words
are 'names' of their "range of stuff." Learning a name for X means
learning how to make a distinction between X and non-X. We cannot claim mastery
of the word 'cat' if we call spiders "cat". We thus learn X and feinot
X together as a single socially shared way to make a distinction. Laozi implies
that in learning to apply the distinction and classify things in one way rather
than another, we are being socialized into an inherited social design.

Much of this approach
to language is common in ancient China. What Laozi adds is that society shapes
our desires via words and distinctions. We will not count as having mastered
the distinction between beautiful and ugly if we prefer the ugly. Acquiring
a "sophisticated" taste molds our desires and shapes our choices and
action.

Artificial desires
increase strife, first because social structures expand the number of desires
and second because the acquired desires are more competitive than natural ones.
We would not naturally desire things, for example, simply because they are rare.
Socially instilled desires motivate a thirst for status and power. Our natural
desires are few and simple.

Finally, the desires
lead to weiaction -a term at the center of Laozi's famous wulack weideem:act
(non-action) slogan. We teach that the word weido:deem has two meanings-'to
act' and 'for the sake of'. Hence, the standard elaboration of Laozi's slogan
is that we should not act deliberately or purposefully. We could motivate this
conclusion using Buddhist or Western psychology (i.e., desires get in the way
of reason), but it is hard to explain why Laozi would recommend being careless
or random in action. He has no concept of reason and treats some desires (e.g.
for sex, food, leisure, etc.) as acceptable.

Weido:deem has
another meaning that explains the slogan better in a Chinese context. Wei is
used in the Chinese approximation of belief contexts ("X believes that
T is P"). Classical Chinese splits the embedded belief sentence. The (optional)
subject (T) comes before the weido:deem and the predicate (P) after. The complete
form is: "X with regard to T, weido:deem [it to be] P."

If we understand
weido:deem as treating things according to what we deem them to be, we get an
insight into Laozi's slogan. It is a corollary of the view that we are to avoid
socially instilled distinctions and desires. So ultimately, we should also avoid
action based on our training in linguistic distinctions. The objection is to
socialization, not rational purpose or deliberation. Laozi indicates that he
senses a paradox in wulack weideem:act. He also says "lack" weido:deem
and yet lack not- weido:deem. The problem is that we have just learned a guiding
concept complete with a distinction, a desire, and a proposed course of action.
If we are to avoid wei we must also avoid avoiding wei.

Laozi's slogan
replicates Shen Dao's "abandon knowledge" paradox (i.e., "abandon
knowledge" is itself a bit of [prescriptive] knowledge). The knowledge
in question is still "social guidance," now analyzed as action guided
by desires engendered by social distinctions and names. Laozi's motivation is
naturalness, spontaneity or freedom from social conventions rather than in fatalism,
but the paradox is in the conclusion, not the motivation. The paradox in wulack
weido:deem follows a bigger and more interesting circle.

The analysis starts
with the concepts of natural/conventional, which it treats as a pivotal distinction.
Laozi teaches us a potentially controversial way to draw the distinction (i.e.,
anything based on 'language' is conventional). It implicitly encourages a preference
or desire for being natural and, finally, based on the names, distinctions and
desires, it recommends an action. Laozi says, "in pursuit of dao we daily
forget." This forgetting is the weideem:act of getting rid of weideem:act.
As long as we do it, we fail to do it. In urging wu-wei we have identified an
action and in striving to avoid it, we are doing what it tells us not to.

Zhuangzi abandoned
the paradoxical wu-wei position, but accepted the analysis showing how distinctions
and desires are "socially constructed." Laozi's paradox vaguely reminds
us of the Buddhist paradox of desire (you must desire to rid yourself of desires).
However, Buddhist theory indicts especially the natural desires. We more plausibly
interpret Laozi's stance as allowing "pre-social" desires. His position
tends toward that of the Confucian nativists, e.g., Mencius. If we can "forget"
the learned desires arising from language socialization, we will return to nature.

The "new born"
child does have desires (e.g., for sex, food, and comfort etc.). These and their
"purely natural" successors are the desires that underwrite Laozi's
"primitive utopia." A suitably reduced system of desires would sustain
social life at the simple agrarian village level but would not generate the
"unnatural" ambition to travel and expand one's horizons of knowledge.

The social analysis
of knowledge (i.e., discourse guidance) is thus accompanied a conception of
innate or natural knowledge (pre-linguistic instinct). This partly gives the
text its notorious ambiguity and contradictory character. One finds passages
in which knowledge, clarity, and sages are ridiculed and their "accomplishments"
pictured as viciously relative. Then other passages speak positively of knowledge,
clarity, and sages.

One philosophical
way of reading Laozi can both ameliorates the paradox and the inconsistency.
It also gives a coherent role to interesting stylistic and content features
of Laozi's philosophical poem. We read the bulk of the text (the political and
metaphysical passages) as a heuristic and separate three systems of knowledge.
The first system of knowledge consists of conventional guidance or wisdom. Conventional
knowledge includes the familiar moral precepts of Confucians (traditionalists)
and the systematic utilitarianism of the Mohists (moral reformers). Moralists
propose schemes of guidance designed in the hope that everyone in society will
learn and follow them. As Laozi noted, these moral systems are based on learning
distinctions and using them in choosing actions.

Laozi challenges
the assumptions behind this "positive" view partly by exhibiting a
system we can call the negative Dao. We get this dao by reversing all conventional
moral assumptions. Laozi's strategy shows that for key guiding terms, we can
choose exactly the opposite of conventional wisdom. He draws the sayings in
this "negative dao" from poems, slogans, couplets and aphorisms collected
from many sources (and as our textual theory suggests, over a long period of
editing). The sources include military stratagems, political cynicism, and Shen
Dao's monism. We may even count Daoist primitivism itself as a heuristic example
of anti-conventional advice.

This negative dao
is Laozi's famous "dao of reversal." Where Confucian or conventional
morality normally values renbenevolence, Laozi notes that tiannature:heaven
is not benevolent. We normally value activity, dominance, the upper position,
strength and upstanding rigidity. Laozi urges us to see the value of passivity,
weakness, the lower position, and receptive yielding. Laozi values dullness
over brilliance, ignorance over knowledge, lacking over having, etc.

These reversals
link up easily with the emerging yin-yang, sexual reproduction cosmology. Laozi
emphasizes the importance of the female and "draws sustenance from the
mother." He treats the female as the "valley of the world." Further,
yin-yang also metaphorically explains the importance of water with its connection
to moisture, the lower position, passivity and overcoming through yielding.

On the metaphysical
side, where we normally value youhaving:being. Laozi points to the utility of
wulacking:non-being. He stresses the usefulness of the emptiness in a cup, a
room and, famously, the hub of a wheel. The knowledge we gain from these "reversals"
of ordinary value may be called "negative knowledge." It consists
in seeing that the conventional ways of using terms to guide us can be reversed.
They are not constant.

However, we cannot
coherently take Laozi to allege that his negative dao is a constant dao. Confucians
criticize the "scheming methods" and the disingenuous tone of some
of the "negative" advice. Laozi, they charge, urges us to act submissive
in order to dominate. He talks of keeping people ignorant, so they can be ruled
more easily.

The criticism implies
that Laozi surreptitiously clings to the conventional values, e.g., he really
aims at domination. We can excuse his doing so if he is trying to make the negative
dao seem plausible from our present lights. However, there is a deeper objection.
Although he reverses the values, he relies on precisely the same conventional
terms and distinctions. Is he still committed to a "constant" dao
based on "constant" names?

The strategy is
to say that the negative dao is a heuristic. It's point is to get us to see
something else. Thus it defends Laozi against these charges. The moral of the
reversal is not simply to replace one normative scheme with another. It calls
in question the whole idea of having a scheme in the first place, hence of any
replacement scheme. Laozi's position might be that the practical "content"
of those conventional distinctions lies in the evaluative attitude that accompanies
them. The conventional assumption is that they guide us correctly. Hence, if
they can be reversed, then the scheme of names is not a "reliable"
way to carve things up.

This conclusion
is somewhat implausible. Names and distinctions that reflect real joints and
fissures of the world can obviously guide us in different ways in different
circumstances. Water is good when we are thirsty and bad when we are drowning.
We can help Laozi's case a little if we assume understood Mohism well enough
to be appealing to its pragmatic analysis of naming. If the justification of
a distinction is only pragmatic success, and if we can show that equal success
follows from reversing conventional guidance, this will either calls into question
either the distinctions themselves or the strings of guiding discourse using
them.

Now, to what guiding
system does the heuristic point? What could the third level of knowledge be?
Laozi formulates no answer. Part of the genius and appeal of Laozi's philosophical
poem is to leave that up to the reader. We can say that it should not simply
be an alternative, posited dao. It is more likely that Laozi intended to challenge
us to make a "philosophical ascent" to higher level of ethical reflection-to
"thinking about thinking." The most plausible point of the Daode Jing's
analysis would be metaethical. It leads us to reflect on the process of proposing
rival daos for the purpose of guidance.

Its thrust seems
to be relativist or skeptical. To say that there is no constant dao is to say
that any dao will be rest on some scheme of background distinctions and attitudes.
All standards consist of distinctions and attitudes which are themselves subject
to revision on subsequent reflection. We may decide that Laozi's point is either
that there is no way or there are many ways of asking and answering ultimate
normative questions.

We can also see
a philosophical role for the religious or mystical reading that dominates translations.
The skeptical point of Laozi's analysis of action-guiding distinctions is that
there really are none. A mystical answer is practically indistinguishable from
the skeptical one. "There is no ultimate criterion of rightness" and
"there is an ultimate criterion that says nothing" will be functionally
equivalent. Laozi's skeptical overtones emerge in his occasional celebration
of "ignorance" or "dullness." There is wisdom in knowing
your not knowing and knowing when to stop.

Biblography

Translations:

Feng, Gia-Fu
and English, Jane (tr). 1972 Lao Tsu: Tao Te Ching (New York: Alfred A. Knopf).

Henricks, Robert
G.. 1989 Lao-tzu: Te-Tao Ching: A New Translation Based on the Recently Discovered
Ma-wang-tui Texts. (New York: Ballantine Books)

Lau, D. C. (tr.).
1963 Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching (Baltimore: Penguin Books).

Discussions:

Graham, Angus.
1989 Disputers of the Tao: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China (La Salle,
IL: Open Court).

Hansen, Chad.
1992 A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought (New York: Oxford University Press).

When words express truth, they are not refined.

When words are refined, they do not express truth.

One who is proficient does not depend on verbal disputation.

One who depends on verbal disputation is not proficient.

One who knows is not encyclopedic.

One who is encyclopedic does not know.

The wise does not accumulate.

The more he works for other people, the more he gains.

The more he shares with other people, the more he receives.

The Tao followed by heaven is to do good and not to harm.

The Tao followed by the wise is to work and not to claim credit.

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good men do not argue.

He who argues is not good.

He who knows, does not learn everything.

He who learns everything, does not know.

The sage does not hoard.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance.

The Tao of Heaven gives benefit but no harm.

The Tao of the sage accomplishes good deeds but makes no claims.

Truthful words are not beautiful;

Beautiful words are not truthful.

He who knows is not widely informed;

He who is widely informed does not know.

He who is good does not have much;

He who has much is not good.

The sage man did not accumulate,

Exhausting himself to help the people,

He was fuller;

Exhausting himself to give the people,

He was richer.

Therefore, heaven's Tao

Benefits without harming;

Man's Tao

Assists without contending.

[
]

He who knows does not speak,

He who speaks does not know.

He who speaks the truth is not arrogant,

He who is arrogant does not speak the truth.

He who has good qualities does not argue,

He who argues does not have good qualities.

He who has learned a lot does not know,

He who knows has not learned a lot.

Therefore the sage does not display his qualities.

Truthful words are not beautiful;

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good words are not persuasive;

Persuasive words are not good.

He who knows has no wide learning;

He who has wide learning does not know.

The
sage does not hoard.

Having bestowed all he has on others, he has yet more;

Having given all he has to others, he is richer still.

The
way of heaven benefits and does not harm;

The way of the sage is bountiful and does not contend.

Propounding the Essential

True words are not pleasant; pleasant words are not true. The good are not contentious; the contentious are not good. The wise are not learned; the learned are not wise.

The holy man hoards not. The more he does for others, the more he owns himself. The more he gives to others, the more will he himself lay up an abundance.

Heaven's Reason is to benefit but not to injure; the holy man's Reason is to accomplish but not to strive.

[
]

True words aren't beautiful. Beautiful words are not truthful. The wise do not argue. Those who argue are not wise. Those who know have no knowledge. Those with knowledge don't know. The master has nothing, but gives everything he has. The more he gives, the happier he is. Only with the Tao can you be fulfilled. The beginning doesn't exist; the end doesn't exist, except through the other. Is finishing verse eighty-one, the end, or the beginning? If you think it is the end, you need to read it again. If you think it is the beginning, you also need to read it again.

Sincere words are not pretty;

pretty words are not sincere.

Good people are not argumentative;

argumentative people are not good.

Learned people are not erudite;

erudite people are not learned.

A sage does not hoard.

The more he/she provides, the more he/she is enriched;

the more he/she gives, the more he/she gains.

The cosmos's Direction is to facilitate and not harm;

The sage's Direction is to provide and not compete.

[
]

Sincere words are never beautiful and beautiful words never sincere.

The noble are never eloquent and the eloquent never noble.

The knowing are never learned and the learned never knowing.

A sage never hoards:

the more you do for others the more plenty is yours,

and the more you give to others the more abundance is yours.

The Way of heaven is to profit without causing harm,

and the Way of a sage to act without contending.

[
]

Credible words are not artful:

Artful words are not credible.

An objective person does not argue;

A person who argues is not objective.

He who knows the truth may not be erudite;

He who is erudite may not know the truth.

The sage does not hoard for himself,

The more he benefits others the happier he becomes,

The more he gives away to others the wealthier he feels.

The way of Heaven; benefits all, harms none.

The way of the sage: be helpful to all, contentious against none.

Believed
words lack embellishment

Embellished words lack belief.

Those
who value lack argument

Those who argue lack valuing

Those who know lack learning

Those who learn lack knowing.

The
sages are without accumulating

Grasping, it happens they act

Others later gain presence

Grasping, it happens they give

Others later gain abundance.

The
tao of the heavens

Benefitting yet without spoiling

The tao of the sages

Acting yet without contending.

(I have finished. Perhaps you may find my discourse lacks something, is not very subtle, and is scarcely wise). This is because native frankness does not dress itself up,

natural directness avoids quibbling,

common sense can dispense with artificial erudition.

The Sage does not hoard, but gives. The more he does for men, the more he can do; the more he gives them, the more he has.

Heaven does good to all, doing no evil to anyone. The Sage imitates it, acting for the good of all, and opposing himself to no one.

True words are not beautiful

Beautiful words are not true

Those who are good do not debate

Those who debate are not good.

Those who know are not broad of knowledge

Those who are broad of knowledge do not know

Sages do not accumulate

The more they assist others, the more they possess

The more they give to others, the more they gain

The Tao of heaven

Benefits and does not harm

The Tao of sages

Assists and does not contend

Sincere words, spoken honestly, may be blunt and direct. People who wish to avoid the truth will not find them pleasant.

Soothing, flowery words that appeal to vanity are not truthful. Such words distort reality in order to deceive or manipulate.

Those who are good in the art of living recognize the futility of arguments, and therefore wisely refrain from engaging in debates. Sages who possess Te let actions reveal their virtues; they have no need to explain themselves with words.

Conversely, someone who is overly argumentative - and thus constantly debates against others - is a person lacking the skill to live a life free of anger and stress. We should also beware of those who constantly explain themselves with glib words, for they do not possess real virtue.

Those who possess true mastery of knowledge have no wish to acquire shallow learning in a broad spectrum of subjects. Someone who really knows, understands that the great Tao lives in the heart. There is no need to search for the Tao all over the place.

Conversely, if someone claims to know something about everything, then chances are excellent that this person has little mastery of any one subject. Being obsessed with a wide variety of book knowledge is a sign of someone who has not yet found the Tao within.

Sages have no need to accumulate worldly knowledge or goods, because they find contentment and abundance in helping and giving. The more they render assistance, the more fulfillment they possess; the more they give to people, the more blessings and wisdom they acquire.

Sages recognize that the positive, uplifting Tao of heaven benefits all living things and does not harm them. In emulating this, sages also seek to benefit others by helping them, and refrain from harming them with contention.

Notes

The first two lines, True words are not beautiful / Beautiful words are not true, can be misused. Sometimes, people who want to criticize others out of malice may use them as justification.

The difference between such people and sages is in terms of intention. When sages speak plainly and truthfully, they do so out of the intention to assist or benefit others - sages have no wish to harm other people with words, or initiate an argument with them.

Oftentimes we think we are helping friends by arguing with them (to "make them see"), but because this brings contention into the relationship, it is usually more harmful than helpful. People are hardly at their best when a debate causes them to become defensive and unyielding.

Another important point related to the first two lines is that sages do not give insincere praise. Saying what people want to hear (beautiful words) may make them feel comfortable in the short term, but if such words distort or conceal reality, they can only lead to harm in the long run.

THE NATURE OF THE ESSENTIAL

Faithful words are often not pleasant; pleasant words are often not faithful. Good men do not dispute; the ones who dispute are not good. The learned men are often not the wise men, nor the wise men, the learned. The wise man does not hoard, but ever working for others, he will the more exceedingly acquire. Having given to others freely, he himself will have in plenty. Tao of heaven benefits but does not injure. The wise man's Tao leads him to act but not to quarrel.

[
]

Truthful (hsin) words (yen) are not beautiful,

Beautiful (mei) words are not truthful.

The good (shan) does not distinguish,

One who distinguishes (pien) is not good.

One who knows (chih) does not accumulate knowledge,

One who accumulates knowledge (po) does not know.

The sage does not hoard.

Having worked (wei) for his fellow beings,

The more he possesses.

Having donated himself to his fellow beings,

The more abundant he becomes.

The way of heaven,

It benefits (li), but does not harm.

The way of the sage,

He works (wei), but does not contend.

Words of truth are not high?sounding; high?sounding words are not truth. One who has Teh does not argue; so one who argues does not have Teh. The truly wise do not know many things; one who knows many things is not truly wise.

The truly wise do not selfishly crave. They live for other people and thereby grow richer. They give freely of themselves and thereby have great abundance.

The great Tao endows but does so unconditionally. The Tao of the wise accomplishes but does so unselfishly.

WITH TAO ... ... THERE IS NO END!
[
]

True words aren't pretty; pretty words aren't true.

The good do not contend; those who contend aren't good.

The wise are not learned; the learned are not wise.

The Tao–Master is not greedy.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the richer he becomes.

The Tao sharpens without cutting.

The Tao–Master acts with non–ado.

[
]

Eighty-one

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good men do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who know are not learned.

The learned do not know.

The sage never tries to store things up.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance.

The Tao of heaven is pointed but does no harm.

The Tao of the sage is work without effort.

Lao Tsu:

Tao Te Ching

A New Translation by Gia-Fu Feng and Jane English

First Vintage Books edition, 1972

http://www.ifa.hawaii.edu/users/gmm/tao/tao.html

LAO TSU AND TAOISM

Lao Tsu, an older contemporary of Confucius, was keeper of the imperial archives at Loyang in the province of Honan in the sixth century B.C. All his life he taught that "The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao"; but, according to ancient legend, as he was riding off into the desert to die - sick at heart at the ways of men - he was persuaded by a gatekeeper in northwestern China to write down his teaching for posterity.

The essence of Taoism is contained in the eighty-one chapters of the book - roughly 5000 words - which have for 2500 years provided one of the major underlying influences in Chinese thought and culture, emerging also in proverbs and folklore. Whereas Confucianism is concerned with day-to-day rules of conduct, Taoism is concern with a more spiritual level of being.

ONE

The Tao that cab be told is not the eternal Tao.

The name that can be named is not the eternal name.

The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.

The named is the mother of ten thousand things.

Ever desireless, one can see the mystery.

Ever desiring, one can see the manifestatiuons.

These two spring from the same source but differ in name;

this appears as darkness.

The gate to all mystery.

TWO

Under heaven all can see beauty as beauty only because there is uglines.

All can know good as good only because there is evil.

Therefore having and not having arise together.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short contrast each other;

High and low rest upon each other;

Voice and sound harmonize each other;

Front and back follow one another.

Therefore the sage goes about doing nothing, teaching no-talking.

The ten thousand things rise and fall without cease,

Creating, yet not possessing,

Working, yet not taking credit.

Work is done, then forgotten.

Therefore it lasts forever.

THREE

Not exalting the gifted prevents quarelling.

Not collecting treasures prevents stealing.

Not seeing desirable things prevents confusion of the heart.

The wise therefore rule by emptying hearts and stuffing bellies,

by weakening ambitions and strengthening bones.

If people lack knowledge and desire,

then intellectuals will not try to interfere.

If nothing is done, then all will be well.

FOUR

The Tao is an empty vessel; it is used, but never filled.

Oh, unfathomable source of ten thousand things!

Blunt the sharpness,

Untangle the knot,

Soften the glare,

Merge with dust.

Oh, hidden deep but ever present!

I do not know from whence it comes.

It is the forefather of the emperors.

FIVE

Heaven and earth are ruthless;

They see the ten thousand things as dummies.

The wise are ruthless;

They see the people as dummies.

The space between heaven and earth is like a bellows.

The shape changes but not the form;

The more it moves, the more it yields.

More words count less.

Hold fast to the center.

SIX

The valley spirit never dies;

It is the woman, primal mother.

Her gateway is the root of heaven and earth.

It is like a veil barely seen.

Use it; it will never fail.

SEVEN

Heaven and earth last forever.

Why do heaven and earth last forever?

They are unborn,

So ever living.

The sage stays behind, thus he is ahead.

He is detached, thus at one with all.

Through selfless action, he attains fulfillment.

EIGHT

The highest good is like water.

Water gives life to the ten thousand things and does not strive.

It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao.

In dwelling, be close to the land.

In meditation, go deep in the heart.

In dealing with others, be gentle and kind.

In speech, be true.

In ruling, be just.

In business, be competent.

In action, watch the timing.

No fight: No blame.

NINE

Better stop short than fill to the brim.

Oversharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt.

Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it.

Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will follow.

Retire when the work is done.

This is the way of heaven.

TEN

Carrying body and soul and embracing the one,

Can you avoid separation?

Attending fully and becoming supple,

Can you be as a newborn babe?

Washing and cleansing the primal vision,

Can you be without stain?

Loving all men and ruling the country,

Can you be without cleverness?

Opening and closing the gates of heaven,

Can you play the role of woman?

Understanding and being open to all things,

Are you able to do nothing?

Gving birth and nourishing,

Bearing yet not possessing,

Working yet not taking credit,

Leading yet not dominating,

This is the Primal Virtue.

ELEVEN

Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub;

It is the center hole that makes it useful.

Shape clay into a vessel;

It is the space within that mekes it useful.

Cut doors and windows for a room;

It is the holes which make it useful.

Therefore profit comes from what is there;

Usefulness from what is not there.

TWELVE

The five colors blind the eye.

The five tones deafen the ear.

The five flavors dull the taste.

Racing and hunting madden the mind.

Precious things lead one astray.

Therefore the sage is guided by what he feels and not by what he sees.

He lets go of that and chooses this.

THIRTEEN

Accept disgrace willingly.

Accept misfortune as the human condition.

What do you mean by "Accept disgrace willingly"?

Accept being unimportant.

Do not be concerned with loss or gain.

This is called "accepthing disgrace willingly."

What do you mean by "Accept misfortune as the human condition"?

Misfortune comes from having a body.

Without a body, how could there be misfortune?

Surrender yourself humbly; then you can be trusted to care for all things.

Love the world as your own self; then you can truly care for all things.

FOURTEEN

Look, it cannot be seen - it is beyond form.

Listen, it cannot be heard - it is beyond sound.

Grasp, it cannot be held - it is intangible.

These three are indefinable;

Therefore they are joined in one.

From above it is not bright;

From below it is not dark:

An unbroken thread beyond description.

It returns to nothingness.

The form of the formless,

The image of the imageless,

It is alled indefinable and beyond imagination.

Stand before it and there is no beginning.

Follow it and there is no end.

Stay with the ancient Tao,

Move with the present.

Knowing the ancient beginning is the essence of Tao.

FIFTEEN

The ancient masters were subtle, mysterious, profound, responsive.

The depth of their knowledge is unfathomable.

Because it is unfathomable,

All we can do is describe their appearance.

Watchful, like men crossing a winter stream.

Alert, like men aware of danger.

Courteous, like visiting guests.

Yielding, like ice about to melt.

Simple, like uncarved blocks of wood.

Hollow, like caves.

Opaque, like muddy pools.

Who can wait quietly while the mud settles?

Who can remain still until the moment of action?

Observers of the Tao do not seek fulfillment.

Not seeking fulfillment, they are not swayed by desire for change.

SIXTEEN

Empty yourself of everything.

Let the mind rest at peace.

The ten thousand things rise and fall while the Self watches their return.

They grow and flourish and then return to the source.

Returning to the source is stillness, which is the way of nature.

The way of nature is unchanging.

Knowing constancy is insight.

Not knowing constancy leads to disaster.

Knowing constancy, the mind is open.

With an open mind, you will be openhearted.

Being openhearted, you will act royally.

Being royal, you will attain the divine.

Being divine, you will be at one with the Tao.

Being one with the Tao is eternal.

And though the body dies, the Tao will never pass away.

SEVENTEEN

The very highest is barely known by men.

Then comes that which they know and love,

Then that which is feared,

Then that which is despised.

He who does not trust enough will not be trusted.

When actions are performed

Without unnecessary speech,

People say, "We did it!"

EIGHTEEN

When the great Tao is forgotten,

Kindness and morality arise.

When wisdom and intelligence are born,

The great pretense begins.

When there is no peace within the family,

Filial piety and devotion arise.

When the country is confused and in chaos,

Loyal ministers appear.

NINETEEN

Give up sainthood, renounce wisdom,

And it will be a hundred times better for everyone.

Give up kindness, renounce morality,

And men will rediscover filial piety and love.

Give up ingenuity, renounce profit,

And bandits and thieves will disappear.

These three are outward forms alone; they are not sufficient in themselves.

It is more important

To see the simplicity,

To realize one's true nature,

To cast off selfishness

And temper desire.

TWENTY

Give up learning, and put an end to your troubles.

Is there a difference between yes and no?

Is there a difference between good and evil?

Must I fear what others fear? What nonsense!

Other people are contented, enjoying the sacrificial feast of the ox.

In spring some go to the park, and climb the terrace,

But I alone am drifting, not knowing where I am.

Like a newborn babe before it learns to smile,

I am alone, without a place to go.

Others have more than they need, but I alone have nothing.

I am a fool. Oh, yes! I am confused.

Other men are clear and bright,

But I alone am dim and weak.

Other men are sharp and clever,

But I alone am dull and stupid.

Oh, I drift like the waves of the sea,

Without direction, like the restless wind.

Everyone else is busy,

But I alone am aimless and depressed.

I am different.

I am nourished by the great mother.

TWENTY-ONE

The greatest Virtue is to follow Tao and Tao alone.

The Tao is elusive and intangible.

Oh, it is intangible and elusive, and yet within is image.

Oh, it is elusive and intangible, and yet within is form.

Oh, it is dim and dark, and yet within is essence.

This essence is very real, and therein lies faith.

From the very beginning until now its name has never been forgotten.

Thus I perceive the creation.

How do I know the ways of creation?

Because of this.

TWENTY-TWO

Yield and overcome;

Bend and be straight;

Empty and be full;

Wear out and be new;

Have little and gain;

Have much and be confused.

Therefore wise men embrace the one

And set an example to all.

Not putting on a display,

They shine forth.

Not justifying themselves,

They are distinguished.

Not boasting,

They receive recognition.

Not bragging,

They never falter.

They do not quarrel,

So no one quarrels with them.

Therefore the ancients say, "Yield and overcome."

Is that an empty saying?

Be really whole,

And all things will come to you.

TWENTY-THREE

To talk little is natural.

High winds do not last all morning.

Heavy rain does not last all day.

Why is this? Heaven and earth!

If heaven and earth cannot make things eternal,

How is it possible for man?

He who follows the Tao

Is at one with the Tao.

He who is virtuous

Experiences Virtue.

He who loses the way

Feels lost.

When you are at one with the Tao,

The Tao welcomes you.

When you are at one with Virtue,

The Virtue is always there.

When you are at one with loss,

The loss is experienced willingly.

He who does not trust enough

Will not be trusted.

TWENTY-FOUR

He who stands on tiptoe is not steady.

He who strides cannot maintain the pace.

He who makes a show is not enlightened.

He who is self-righteous is not respected.

He who boasts achieves nothing.

He who brags will not endure.

According to the followers of the Tao,

"These are extra food and unnecessary luggage."

They do not bring happiness.

Therefore followers of the Tao avoid them.

TWENTY-FIVE

Something mysteriously formed,

Born before heaven and earth.

In the silene and the void,

Standing alone and unchanging,

Ever present and in motion.

Perhaps it is the mother of ten thousand things.

I do not know its name.

Call it Tao.

For lack of a better word, I call it great.

Being great, it flows.

It flows far away.

Having gone far, it returns.

Therefore, "Tao is great;

Heaven is great;

Earth is great;

The king is also great."

These are the four great powers

of the universe,

And the king is one of them.

Man follows the earth.

Earth follows heaven.

Heaven follows the Tao.

Tao follows what is natural.

TWENTY-SIX

The heavy is the root of the light;

The still is the master of unrest.

Therefore the sage, travelling all day,

Does not lose sight of his baggage.

Though there are beautiful things to be seen,

He remains unattached and calm.

Why should the lord of ten thousand chariots act lightly in public?

To be light is to lose one's root.

To be restless is to lose one's control.

TWENTY-SEVEN

A good walker leaves no tracks;

A good speaker makes no slips;

A good reckoner need to tally.

A good door needs no lock,

Yet no one can open it.

Good binding requires no knots,

Yet no one can loosen it.

Therefore the sage takes care of all men

And abandons no one.

He takes care of all things

And abandons nothing.

This is called "following the light."

What is a good man?

A teacher of a bad man.

What is a bad man?

A good man's charge.

If the teacher is not respected,

And the student not cared for,

Confusion will arise, however clever one is.

This is the crux of the mystery.

TWENTY-EIGHT

Know the strength of man,

But keep a woman's care!

Be the stream of the universe!

Being the stream of the univere,

Ever true and unswerving,

Become as a little child once more.

Know the white,

But keep the black!

Be an example to the world!

Being an example to the world,

Ever true and unwavering,

Return to the infinite.

Know honor,

Yet keep humility.

Be the valley of the universe!

Being the valley of the universe,

Ever true and resourceful,

Return to the state of the uncarved block.

When the block is carved, it becomes useful.

When the sage uses it, he become the ruler.

Thus, "A great tailor cuts little."

TWENTY-NINE

Do you think you can take over the universe and improve it?

I do not think it can be done.

The universe is sacred.

You cannot improve it.

If you try to change it, you will ruin it.

If you try to hold it, you will lose it.

So sometimes things are ahead and sometimes they are behind;

Sometimes breathing is hard, sometimes it comes easily;

Sometimes ther is strength and sometimes weakness;

Sometimes one is up and sometimes down.

Therefore the sage avoids extremes, excesses, and complacency.

THIRTY

Whenever you advise a ruler in the way of Tao,

Counsel him not to use force to conquer the universe.

For this would only cause resistance.

Thorn bushes spring up wherever the army has passed.

Lean years follow in the wake of a great war.

Just do what needs to be done.

Never take advantage of power.

Achieve results,

But never glory in them.

Achieve results,

But never boast.

Achieve results,

But never be proud.

Achieve results,

Because this is the natural way.

Achieve results,

But not through violence.

Force is followed by loss of strength.

This is not the way of Tao.

That which goes against the Tao

comes to an early end.

THIRTY-ONE

Good weapons are instruments of fear; all creatures hate them.

Therefore followers of Tao never use them.

The wise man prefers the left.

The man of war prefers the right.

Weapons are instruments of fear; they are not a wise man's tools.

He uses them only when he has no choice.

Peace and quiet are dear to his heart,

And victory no cause for rejoicing.

If you rejoice in victory, then you delight in killing;

If you delight in killing, you cannot fulfill yourself.

On happy occasions precedence is given to the left,

On sad occasions to the right.

In the army the general stands on the left,

The commander-in-chief on the right.

This means that war is conducted like a funeral.

When many people are being killed,

They should be mourned in heartfelt sorrow.

That is why a victory must be observed like a funeral.

THIRTY-TWO

The Tao is forever undefined.

Small though it is in the unformed state, it cannot be grasped.

If kings and lords could harness it,

The ten thousand things would naturally obey.

Heaven and earth would come together

And gentle rain fall.

Men would need no more instruction

and all things would take their course.

Once the whole is divided, the parts need names.

There are already enough names.

One must know when to stop.

Knowing when to stop averts trouble.

Tao in the world is like a river flowing home to the sea.

THIRTY-THREE

Knowing others is wisdom;

Knowing the self is enlightenment.

Mastering others requires force;

Mastering the self needs strength.

He who knows he has enough is rich.

Perseverance is a sign of will power.

He who stays where he is endures.

To die but not to perish is to be eternally present.

THIRTY-FOUR

The great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left and to the right.

The ten thousand things depend upon it; it holds nothing back.

It fulfills its purpose silently and makes no claim.

It nourishes the ten thousand things,

And yet is not their lord.

It has no aim; it is very small.

The ten thousand things return to it,

Yet it is not their lord.

It is very great.

It does not show greatness,

And is therefore truly great.

THIRTY-FIVE

All men will come to him who keeps to the one,

For there lie rest and happiness and peace.

Passersby may stop for music and good food,

But a description of the Tao

Seems without substance or flavor.

It cannot be seen, it cannot be heard,

And yet it cannot be exhausted.

THIRTY-SIX

That which shrinks

Must first expand.

That which fails

Must first be strong.

That which is cast down

Must first be raised.

Before receiving

There must be giving.

This is called perception of the nature of things.

Soft and weak overcome hard and strong.

Fish cannot leave deep waters,

And a country's weapons should not be displayed.

THIRTY-SEVEN

Tao abides in non-action,

Yet nothing is left undone.

If kings and lords observed this,

The ten thousand things would develop naturally.

If they still desired to act,

They would return to the simplicity of formless substance.

Without form there is no desire.

Without desire there is tranquility.

And in this way all things would be at peace.

THIRTY-EIGHT

A truly good man is not aware of his goodness,

And is therefore good.

A foolish man tries to be good,

And is therefore not good.

A truly good man does nothing,

Yet leaved nothing undone.

A foolish man is always doing,

Yet much remains to be done.

When a truly kind man does something, he leaves nothing undone.

When a just man does something, he leaves a great deal to be done.

When a disciplinarian does something and no one responds,

He rolls up his sleeves in an attempt to enforce order.

Therefore when Tao is lost, there is goodness.

When goodness is lost, there is kindness.

When kindness is lost, there is justice.

When justice is lost, there is ritual.

Now ritual is the husk of faith and loyalty, the beginning of confusion.

Knowledge of the future is only a flowery trapping of Tao.

It is the beginning of folly.

Therefore the truly great man dwells on what is real

and not what is on the surface,

On the fruit and not the flower.

Therefore accept the one and reject the other.

THIRTY-NINE

These things from ancient times arise frome one:

The sky is whole and clear.

The earth is whole and firm.

The spirit is whole and strong.

the valley is whole and full.

The ten thousand things are whole and alive.

Kings and lords are whole, and the country is upright.

All these are in virtue of wholeness.

The clarity of the sky prevents its falling.

The firmness of the earth prevents its splitting.

The strength of the spirit prevents its being used up.

The fullness of the valley prevents its running dry.

The growth of the ten thousand things prevents their dying out.

The leadership of kings and lords prevents the downfall

of the country.

Therefore the humble is the root of the noble.

The low is the foundation of the high.

Princes and lords consider themselves

"orphaned," "widowed," and "worthless."

Do they not depend on being humble?

Too much success is not an advantage.

Do not tinkle like jade

Or clatter like stone chimes.

FORTY

Returning is the motion of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

The ten thousand things are born of being.

Being is born of not being.

FORTY-ONE

The wise student hears of the Tao and practices it diligently.

The average student hears of the Tao and gives it thought now and again.

The foolish student hears of the Tao and laughs aloud.

If there were no laughter, the Tao would not be what it is.

Hence it is said:

The bright path seems dim;

Going forward seems like retreat;

The easy way seems hard;

The highest Virtue seems empty;

Great purity seems sullied;

A wealth of Virtue seems inadequate;

The strength of Virtue seems frail;

Real Virtue seems unreal;

The perfect square has no corners;

Great talents ripen late;

The highest notes are hard to hear;

The greatest form has no shape.

The Tao is hidden and without name.

The Tao alone nourishes and brings everything to fulfillment.

FORTY-TWO

The Tao begot one.

One begot two.

Two begot three.

And three begot the ten thousand things.

The ten thousand things carry yin and embrance yang.

They achieve harmony by combining these forces.

Men hate to be ''orphaned,'' ''widowed,'' or ''worthless,''

But this is how kings and lords describe themselves.

For one gains by losing

And loses by gaining.

What others teach, I also teach; that is:

"A violent man will die a violent death!"

This will be the essence of my teaching.

FORTY-THREE

The softest thing in the universe

Overcomes the hardest thing in the universe.

That without substance can enter where there is no room.

Hence I know the value of non-action.

Teaching without words and work without doing

Are understood by very few.

FORTY-FOUR

Fame or self: Which matters more?

Self or wealth: Which is more precious?

Gain or loss: Which is more painful?

He who is attached to things will suffer much.

He who saves will suffer heavy loss.

A contented man is never disappointed.

He who knows when to stop does not find himself in trouble.

He will stay forever safe.

FORTY-FIVE

Great accomplishment seems imperfect,

Yet it does not outlive its usefulness.

Great fullness seems empty,

Yet it cannot be exhausted.

Great straightness seems twisted.

Great intelligence seems stupid.

Great eloquence seems awkward.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Stillness and tranquillity set things in order in the universe.

FORTY-SIX

When the Tao is present in the universe,

The horses haul manure.

When the Tao is absent from the universe,

War horses are bred outside the city.

There is no greater sin than desire,

No greater curse than discontent,

No greater misfortune than wanting something for oneself.

Therefore he who knows that enough is enough will always have enough.

FORTY-SEVEN

Without going outside, you may know the whole world.

Without looking through the window, you may see the ways of heaven.

The farther you go, the less you know.

Thus the sage knows without traveling;

He sees without looking;

He works without doing.

FORTY-EIGHT

In the pursuit of learning, every day something is acquired.

In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is dropped.

Less and less is done

Until non-action is achieved.

When nothing is done, nothing is left undone.

The world is ruled by letting things take their course.

It cannot be ruled by interfering.

FORTY-NINE

The sage has no mind of his own.

He is aware of the needs of others.

I am good to people who are good.

I am also good to people who are not good.

Because Virtue is goodness.

I have faith in people who are faithful.

I also have faith in people who are not faithful.

Because Virtue is faithfulness.

The sage is shy and humble - to the world he seems confusing.

Men look to him and listen.

He behaves like a little child.

FIFTY

Between birth and death,

Three in ten are followers of life,

Three in ten are followers of death,

And men just passing from birth to death also number three in ten.

Why is this so?

Because they live their lives on the gross level.

He who knows how to live can walk abroad

Without fear of rhinoceros or tiger.

He will not be wounded in battle.

For in him rhinoceroses can find no place to thrust their horn,

Tigers no place to use their claws,

And weapons no place to pierce.

Why is this so?

Because he has no place for death to enter.

FIFTY-ONE

All things arise from Tao.

They are nourished by Virtue.

They are formed from matter.

They are shaped by environment.

Thus the ten thousand things all respect Tao and honor Virtue.

Respect of Tao and honor of Virtue are not demanded.

But they are in the nature of things.

Therefore all things arise from Tao.

By Virtue they are nourished,

Developed, cared for,

Sheltered, comforted,

Grown, and protected.

Creating without claiming,

Doing without taking credit,

Guiding without interfering,

This is the Primal Virtue.

FIFTY-TWO

The beginning of the universe

Is the mother of all things.

Knowing the mother, one also knows the sons.

Knowing the sons, yet remaining in touch with the mother,

Brings freedom from the fear of death.

Keep your mouth shut,

Guard the senses,

And life is ever full.

Open your mouth,

Always be busy,

And life is beyond hope.

Seeing the small is insight;

Yielding to fore is strength.

Using the outer light, return to insight,

And in this way be saved from harm.

This is learning constancy.

FIFTY-THREE

If I have even just a little sense,

I will walk on the main road and my only fear will be of straying from it.

Keeping to the main road is easy,

But people love to be sidetracked.

When the court is arrayed in splendor,

The fields are full of weeds,

And the granaries are bare.

Some wear gorgeous clothes,

Carry sharp swords,

And indulge themselves with food and drink;

They have more possessions than they can use.

They are robber barons.

This is certainly not the way of Tao.

FIFTY-FOUR

What is firmly established cannot be uprooted.

What is firmly grasped cannot slip away.

It will be honored from generation to generation.

Cultivate Virtue in your self,

And Virtue will be real.

Cultivate it in the family,

And Virtue will abound.

Cultivate it in the village,

And Virtue will grow.

Cultivate it in the nation,

And Virtue will be abundant.

Cultivate it in the universe,

And Virtue will be everywhere.

Therefore look at the body as body;

Look at the family as family;

Look at the village as village;

Look at the nation as nation;

Look at the universe as universe.

How do I know the universe is like this?

By looking!

FIFTY-FIVE

He who is filled with Virtue is like a newborn child.

Wasps and serpents will not sting him;

Wild beasts will not pounce upon him;

He will not be attacked by birds of prey.

His bones are soft, his muscles weak,

But his grip is firm.

He has not experienced the union of man and woman, but is whole.

His manhood is strong.

He screams all day without becoming hoarse.

This is perfect harmony.

Knowing harmony is constancy.

Knowing constancy is enlightenment.

It is not wise to rush about.

Controlling the breath causes strain.

If too much energy is used, exhaustion follows.

This is not the way of Tao.

Whatever is contrary to Tao will not last long.

FIFTY-SIX

Those who know do not talk.

Those who talk do not know.

Keep your mouth closed.

Guard your senses.

Temper your sharpness.

Simplify your problems.

Mask your brightness.

Be at one with the dust of the earth.

This is primal union.

He who has achieved this state

Is unconcerned with friends and enemies,

With good and harm, with honor and disgrace.

This therefore is the highest state of man.

FIFTY-SEVEN

Rule a nation with justice.

Wage war with surprise moves.

Become master of the universe without striving.

How do I know that this is so?

Because of this!

The more laws and restrictions there are,

The poorer people become.

The sharper men's weapons,

The more trouble in the land.

The more ingenious and clever men are,

The more strange things happen.

The more rules and regulations,

The more thieves and robbers.

Therefore the sage says:

I take no action and people are reformed.

I enjoy peace and people become honest.

I do nothing and people become rich.

I have no desires and people return to the good and simple life.

FIFTY-EIGHT

When the country is ruled with a light hand

The people are simple.

When the country is ruled with severity,

The people are cunning.

Happiness is rooted in misery.

Misery lurks beneath happiness.

Who knows what the future holds?

There is no honesty.

Honesty becomes dishonest.

Goodness becomes witchcraft.

Man's bewitchment lasts for a long time.

Therefore the sage is sharp but not cutting,

Pointed but not piercing,

Straightforward but not unrestrained,

Brilliant but not blinding.

FIFTY-NINE

In caring for others and serving heaven,

There is nothing like using restraint.

Restraint begins with giving up one's own ideas.

This depends on Virtue gathered in the past.

If there is a good store of Virtue, then nothing is impossible.

If nothing is impossible, then there are no limits.

If a man knows no limits, then he is fit to be a ruler.

The mother principle of ruling holds good for a long time.

This is called having deep roots and a firm foundation,

The Tao of long life and eternal vision.

SIXTY

Ruling the country is like cooking a small fish.

Approach the universe with Tao,

And evil will have no power.

Not that evil is not powerful,

But its power will not be used to harm others.

Not only will it do no harm to others,

But the sage himself will also be protected.

They do not hurt each other,

And the Virtue in each one refreshes both.

SIXTY-ONE

A great country is like low land.

It is the meeting ground of the universe,

The mother of the universe.

The female overcomes the male with stillness,

Lying low in stillness.

Therefore if a great country gives way to a smaller country,

It will conquer the smaller country.

And if a small country submits to a great country,

It can conquer the great country.

Therefore those who would conquer must yield,

And those who conquer do so because they yield.

A great nation needs more people;

A small country needs to serve.

Each gets what it wants.

It is fitting for a great nation to yield.

SIXTY-TWO

Tao is the source of the ten thousand things.

It is the treasure of the good man, and the refuge of the bad.

Sweet words can buy honor;

Good deeds can gain respect.

If a man is bad, do not abandon him.

Therefore on the day the emperor is crowned,

Or the three officers of state installed,

Do not send a gift of jade and a team of four horses,

But remain still and offer the Tao.

Why does everyone like the Tao so much at first?

Isn't it because you find what you seek and are forgiven when you sin?

Therefore this is the greatest treasure of the universe.

SIXTY-THREE

Practice non-action.

Work without doing.

Taste the tasteless.

Magnify the small, increase the few.

Reward bitterness with care.

See simplicity in the complicated.

Achieve greatness in little things.

In the universe the difficult things are done as if they are easy.

In the uinverse great acts are made up of small deeds.

The sage does not attempt anything very big,

And thus achieves greatness.

Easy promises make for little trust.

Taking things lightly results in great difficulty.

Because the sage always confronts difficulties,

He never experiences them.

SIXTY-FOUR

Peace is easily maintained;

Trouble is easily overcome before it starts.

The brittle is easily shattered;

The small is easily scattered.

Deal with it before it happens.

Set things in order before there is confusion.

A tree as great as a man's embrace springs from a small shoot;

A terrace nine stories high begins with a pile of earth;

A journey of a thousand miles starts under one's feet.

He who acts defeats his own purpose;

He who grasps loses.

The sage does not act, and so is not defeated.

He does not grasp and therefore does not lose.

People usually fail when they are on the verge of success.

So give as much care to the end as to the beginning;

Then there will be no failure.

Therefore the sage seeks freedom from desire.

He does not collect precious things.

He learns not to hold on to ideas.

He brings men back to what they have lost.

He helps the ten thousand things find their own nature,

But refrains from action.

SIXTY-FIVE

In the beginning those who knew the Tao did not try to enlighten others,

But kept them in the dark.

Why is it so hard to rule?

Because people are so clever.

Rulers who try to use cleverness

Cheat the country.

Those who rule without cleverness

Are a blessing to the land.

These are the two alternatives.

Understanding these is Primal Virtue.

Primal Virtue is deep and far.

It leads all things back

Toward the great oneness.

SIXTY-SIX

Why is the sea king of a hundred streams?

Because it lies below them.

Therefore it is the king of a hundred streams.

If the sage would guide the people, he must serve with humility.

If he would lead them, he must follow behind.

In this way when the sage rules, the people will not feel oppressed;

When he stands before them, they will not be harmed.

The whole world will support him and will not tire of him.

Because he does not compete,

He does not meet competition.

SIXTY-SEVEN

Everyone under heaven says that my Tao is great and beyond compare.

Because it is great, it seems different.

If it were not different, it would have vanished long ago.

I have three treasures which I hold and keep.

The first is mercy; the second is economy;

The third is daring not to be ahead of others.

From mercy comes courage; from economy comes generosity;

From humility comes leadership.

Nowadays men shun mercy, but try to be brave;

They abandon economy, but try to be generous;

They do not believe in humility, but always try to be first.

This is certain death.

Mercy brings victory in battle and strength in defense.

It is the means by which heaven saves and guards.

SIXTY-EIGHT

A good soldier is not violent.

A good fighter is not angry.

A good winner is not vengeful.

A good employer is humble.

This is known as the Virtue of not striving.

This is known as ability to deal with people.

This since ancient times has been known

as the ultimate unity with heaven.

SIXTY-NINE

There is a saying among soldiers:

I dare not make the first move but would rather play the guest;

I dare not advance an inch but would rather withdraw a foot.

This is called marching without appearing to move,

Rolling up your sleeves without showing your arm,

Capturing the enemy without attacking,

Being armed without weapons.

There is no greater catastrophe than underestimating the enemy.

By underestimating the enemy, I almost lose what I value.

Therefore when the battle is joined,

The underdog will win.

SEVENTY

My words are easy to understand and easy to perform,

Yet no man under heaven knows them or practices them.

My words have ancient beginnings.

My actions are disciplined.

Because men do not understand, they have no knowledge of me.

Those that know me are few;

Those that abuse me are honoured.

Therefore the sage wears rough clothing and holds the jewel in his heart.

SEVENTY-ONE

Knowing ignorance is strength.

Ignoring knowledge is sickness.

If one is sick of sickness, then one is not sick.

The sage is not sick because he is sick of sickness.

Therefore he is not sick.

SEVENTY-TWO

When men lack a sense of awe, there will be disaster.

Do not intrude in their homes.

Do not harass them at work.

If you do not interfere, they will not weary of you.

Therefore the sage knows himself but makes no show,

Has self-respect but is not arrogant.

He lets go of that and chooses this.

SEVENTY-THREE

A brave and passionate man will kill or be killed.

A brave and calm man will always preserve life.

Of these two which is good and which is harmful?

Some things are not favoured by heaven. Who knows why?

Even the sage is unsure of this.

The Tao of heaven does not strive, and yet it overcomes.

It does not speak, and yet is answered.

It does not ask, yet is supplied with all its needs.

It seems at ease, and yet it follows a plan.

Heaven's net casts wide.

Though its meshes are coarse, nothing slips through.

SEVENTY-FOUR

If men are not afraid to die,

It is of no avail to threaten them with death.

If men live in constant fear of dying,

And if breaking the law means that a man will be killed,

Who will dare to break the law?

There is always an official executioner.

If you try to take his place,

It is like trying to be a master carpenter and cutting wood.

If you try to cut wood like a master carpenter,

you will only hurt your hand.

SEVENTY-FIVE

Why are the people starving?

Because the rulers eat up the money in taxes.

Therefore the people are starving.

Why are the people rebellious?

Because the rulers interfere too much.

Therefore they are rebellious.

Why do the people think so little of death?

Because the rulers demand too much of life.

Therefore the people take death lightly.

Having little to live on, one knows better than to value life too much.

SEVENTY-SIX

A man is born gentle and weak.

At his death he is hard and stiff.

Green plants are tender and filled with sap.

At their death they are withered and dry.

Therefore the stiff and unbending is the disciple of death.

The gentle and yielding is the disciple of life.

Thus an army without flexibility never wins a battle.

A tree that is unbending is easily broken.

The hard and strong will fall.

The soft and weak will overcome.

SEVENTY-SEVEN

The Tao of heaven is like the bending of a bow.

The high is lowered, and the low is raised.

If the string is too long, it is shortened;

If there is not enough, it is made longer.

The Tao of heaven is to take from those who have too much

and give to those who do not have enough.

Man's way is different.

He takes from those who do not have enough

to give to those who already have too much.

What man has more than enough and gives it to the world?

Only the man of Tao.

Therefore the sage works without recognition.

He achieves what has to be done without dwelling on it.

He does not try to show his knowledge.

SEVENTY-EIGHT

Under heaven nothing is more soft and yielding than water.

Yet for attacking the solid and strong, nothing is better;

It has no equal.

The weak can overcome the strong;

The supple can overcome the stiff.

Under heaven everyone knows this,

Yet no one puts it into practice.

Therefore the sage says:

He who takes upon himself the humiliation of the people

is fit to rule them.

He who takes upon himself the country's disasters deserves

to be king of the universe.

The truth often sounds paradoxical.

SEVENTY-NINE

After a bitter quarrel, some resentment must remain.

What can one do about it?

Therefore the sage keeps his half of the bargain

But does not exact his due.

A man of Virtue performs his part,

But a man without Virtue requires others to fulfill their obligations.

The Tao of heaven is impartial.

It stays with good men all the time.

EIGHTY

A small country has fewer people.

Though there are machines that can work ten to a hundred times faster

than man, they are not needed.

The people take death seriously and do not travel far.

Though they have boats and carriage, no one uses them.

Though they have armour and weapons, no one displays them.

Men return to the knotting of rope in place of writing.

Their food is plain and good, their clothes fine but simple,

their homes secure;

They are happy in their ways.

Though they live within sight of their neighbours,

And crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard across the way,

Yet they leave each other in peace while they grow old and die.

EIGHTY-ONE

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good men do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who know are not learned.

The learned do not know.

The sage never tries to store things up.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance.

The Tao of heaven is pointed but does no harm.

The Tao of the sage is work without effort.

A NOTE ABOUT THE TRANSLATORS

Gia-fu Feng was born in Shanghai in 1919, was educated in China, and came to the United States in 1947 to study comparative religion. He holds a BA from Peking University and an MA from the Universtiy of Pennsylvania. He has taught at the Esalen Institute, Big Sur, and now directs the Stillpoint Foundation, a Taoist meditation center in Colorado. He is the author (with Jerome Kirk) of Tai Chi - A Way of Centering - & I Ching, which was published in 1970.

Jane English, whose photograps form an integral part of this book, holds an BA from Mount Holyoke College and has received a doctorate from the University of Wisconsin for her work in high energy particle physics. She is at the moment teaching a course in Oriental thought and modern physics at Colorado College (with Gia-fu Feng as guest lecturer). She was born in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1942.

True words are not embellished,

The embellished words are not true.

A good man does not quibble;

He who quibbles is not good.

A man of true learning does not show off his learning;

He who shows off his learning does not have true learning.

The sage does not store up.

Helping others as best as he can,

He is helped even more.

Giving others as much as he can,

He becomes richer and richer still.

The Tao of heaven benefits rather than harms all things;

The Tao of the sage is to give rather than rob the people.

[
]

Trustworthy words are not beautiful,

Beautiful words are not trustworthy.

The good are not eloquent,

The eloquent are not good.

The wise are not learned,

The learned are not wise.

The sage stocks up nothing.

After using for others what he has,

He finds himself with still more.

After giving to others what he has,

He finds his stock even greater.

The way of Heaven

Is to benefit and not to harm.

The way of the sage

Is to rule and not to contend.

[
]

Truthful words are usually plain and not flowery.

Embroidered words are not always truthful.

A person who abides to the principles of Dao does not resort to sophistry.

He who resorts to sophistry to win an argument does not follow the way of Dao.

The erudite scholar may only have circumscribed knowledge.

He who has extensive knowledge may not be erudite.

The sage does not hoard.

The more he serves others, the more he has in reserve.

The more he gives away, the more he has in abundance.

The predisposition of Dao is to benefit everything, and it does not cause any harm.

The way of the sage is to accomplish but not to compete.

[
]

Expressing the Essential

Hsien Chih

Truthful words do not sound sweet;

Sweet words are not truthful.

Good men do not argue;

Those who argue are lacking in goodness.

The seers of truth are not vast in learning;

People with vast learning are not seers.

The Sage does not hoard.

The more he serves the people,

The more he gains.

The more he gives to the people,

The more he possesses.

The Way of Heaven is to benefit, not to harm;

The way of the Sage is to act, not to contend.

[
]

Truth has no need for fine words;

Fine words may not be true words.

The man of Tao does not try to convince by argument:

He who argues is not a man of Tao.

Wisdom does not consist in knowing everything;

The know-alls do not know the Tao.

The Sage does not hoard. The more he spends himself for others, the more he enriches himself.

The more he fives, the more he gains.

For the Tao of Heaven penetrates all things but harms none.

This, too, is the Tao of the Sage, who acts without contending.

[
]

True words are not nice;

Nice words are not true.

A good man does not argue;

An arguer is not good.

The wise are not learned;

The learned are not wise.

The sage does not hoard.

The more he does for others,

The more he has himself.

The more he gives,

The more he gets.

The way of Heaven is

To benefit but not to harm.

The way of the sage is

To work but not compete.

[
]

True words are not necessarily beautiful.

Beautiful words are not necessarily truthful.

One who is achieved does not argue,

and one who argues is not achieved.

One who knows the deepest truth does not need segmented information.

One who knows vast amounts of information may not know the truth.

One of deep virtue is not occupied with amassing material goods,

yet the more he lives for others, the richer his life becomes.

The more he gives, the more his life abounds.

The subtle Way of the universe is beneficial, not harmful.

The integral nature of a person is to extend one's virtue unconditionally and to contend with no one.

[
]

LXXXI.

Making
Clear the Substance

Sincere
words are not fine,

Fine
words are not sincere,

[The
Faithful friend will stick to the end,

But
the flatterer tickles the ear.]

The
skillful do not debate,

Debaters
lack in skill,

[For
truth is found by looking around,

And
words are weapons of ill.]

The
knowing are not most learned,

The
most learned do not know,

[For
knowledge is grown from thought alone,

While
learning from others must grow.]

The
sage lays up no treasure,

No
hoard of goods or gold,

[For
they who keep a store-house deep,

A
constant watch must hold.]

The
more
he works for others

The
more
he works for his own,

[For
it grows by use, is lost by abuse,

And
he gathers by what
he
has sown.]

The
more
he gives away,

The
more does he have himself,

[For
thought s a thing that from thought will spring,

Which
is quite the reverse of pelf.]

The
Way of Heaven is sharp,

But
it never will cut nor wound,

[For
they who swim with the flowing stream

Will
ever be safe and sound.]

Tis
the way of the sage to act,

He
acts but never strives,

[For
striving breaks whatever it makes,

And only a wreck survives.]

Faithful words may not be beautiful,

Beautiful words may not be faithful.

Those who love do not quarrel,

Those who quarrel do not love.

Those who know are not learned,

Those who are learned do not know.

The riches of the self-controlled man are in the Inner Life.

When he spends for others, he has more for himself.

When he gives to others, he has much more for himself.

Heavenly Tao blesses all and hurts no one.

The way of the self-controlled man is to act and not to fight.

[
]

Honest words

are not sweet,

Sweet words

are not honest.

Good people

are not bad-tempered,

The bad-tempered

are not good.

The wise

do not think of themselves

as knowing more than others,

the ones

who think of themselves

as knowing more than others

are not wise.

The Complete Thinker

does not collect riches.

The more they lives for others,

The fuller is their life.

The more they give,

the more they win.

The Laws of the Universe (Tao)

are to help,

not to hurt.

The Way of the Complete Thinker

is to do their duty,

not to compete

with anyone.

He who knows, speaks not.

He who speaks, knows not.

He who is sincere, does not embellish.

He who embellishes, is not sincere.

He who is good, disputes not.

He who disputes, is not good.

He who knows, does not game.

He who games, knows not.

Sincere words are not fine; fine words are not sincere. Those

who are skilled (in the Tao) do not dispute (about it); the

disputatious are not skilled in it. Those who know (the Tao) are not

extensively learned; the extensively learned do not know it.

The
sage does not accumulate (for himself). The more that he

expends for others, the more does he possess of his own; the more that

he gives to others, the more does he have himself.

With
all the sharpness of the Way of Heaven, it injures not; with

all the doing in the way of the sage he does not strive.

Sincere
words are not 'elegant.' Elegance of speech is insincere.
One who knows
is not 'learned;' Learnedness is not knowledge.
One who is 'good' does not
have much; Possessions are not virtue.
Sages
do not hoard.
The more they do for others,
the more they have, themselves;

the more they give to others,
the more their own bounty is increased.

Thus
the Path of DEI-ty benefits without harming;
the way of ego 'acts' but without
effect.

Truth
need not be eloquent

And eloquence may not be true

There is no need to argue

When truth is shining through

Those
who see may not be learned

The learned may not see

To see you merely need to look

In pure simplicity

The
seer doesn't have to hoard

And does not fear to lose

The more you give, the more you have

So why should you refuse?

Why
not give it all away?

For emptiness brings benefit

And as the seers always say

The more you give, the more you get

SINCERE words are not sweet,

Sweet words are not sincere.

Good men are not argumentative,

The argumentative are not good.

The wise are not erudite,

The erudite are not wise.

The Sage does not take to hoarding.

The more he lives for others, the fuller is his life.

The more he gives, the more he abounds.

The Way of Heaven is to benefit, not to harm.

The Way of the Sage is to do his duty, not to strive with anyone.

Truth is not spoken with rhetoric;

rhetoric does not embrace truth.

The good do not quarrel; those who quarrel are not good.

Those who know are not widely learned, those who are widely learned do not know.

The sage does not hoard for himself. The more he does to help others, the more he can do.

The more he gives to others the more his own treasures increase.

The way of Heaven is to cause benefit, not harm.

Therefore the sage observes this and imitates it.

He acts, serves, and does without relentless striving.

[
]

True words do not sound beautiful;

beautiful sounding words are not true.

Wise men don't need to debate;

men who need to debate are not wise.

Wise
men are not scholars,

and scholars are not wise.

The Master desires no possessions.

Since the things she does is for the people,

she has more than she needs.

The more she gives to others,

the more she has for herself.

The
Tao of Heaven nourishes by not forcing.

The Tao of the Wise person acts by not competing.

It is more important to tell the simple, blunt truth than it is to say things that sound good. The group is not a contest of eloquence.

It is more important to act in behalf of everyone than it is to win arguments. The group is not a debating society.

It is more important to react wisely to what is happening than it is to be able to explain everything in terms of certain theories. The group is not a final examination for a college courses.

The wise leader is not collecting a string of successes. The leader is helping others to find their own success. There is plenty to go around. Sharing success with others is very successful.

The single principle behind all creation teaches us that true benefit blesses everyone and diminishes no one.

The wise leader knows that the reward for doing the work arises naturally out of the work.

[
]

True words are not beautifull.

Beautifu words are not true.

Good people do not argue.

Argumentative people are not good.

The wise are not necessarily well-educated.

The well-educated are not necessarily wise.

The Sage does not hoard things.

The more she does for others

The more she finds she has.

The more she gives to others

The more she finds she gains.

Heaven's Way is to nourish, not to harm.

The Sage's Way is to work, yet not compete.

Truthful
words are seldom passionate.

Passionate words are seldom truthful.

Peaceful
men do not quarrel.

Those who quarrel are confused.

He
who is at one with all things

knows Infinity.

He who has knowledge

is always confused.

The
sage is never confused by accumulating.

The more he does for others,

the more he flows in harmony.

The more he gives to others,

the more he experiences peace.

Infinity
manifests, nourishes and disintegrates

forever.

The sage flows in the peace and harmony

of oneness with all things.

True words are not flattering.

Flattering words are not true.

The Good do not argue.

One who argues is not Good.

The wise are not learned.

The learned are not wise.

The wise man does not hoard.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he does with others, the better he becomes.

Heaven's Way is to help, not harm.

The wise man's Way is to act without strife.Source Materials

Karl Kromal © December 2002 | email: vnobles@stny.rr.com

[
]

True words are not beautiful;

Beautiful words are not true.

Those who are good do not argue;

Those who argue are not good.

Those who are wise are not learned;

Those who are learned are not wise.

The Sage does not store up possessions.

The more he helps others, the more he fulfils himself.

The more he gives to others, the more he has for himself.

The Way of Heaven is to benefit others whilst harming no one.

The Way of the Sage is to accomplish without striving.

[
]

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good words are not eloquent.

Eloquent words are not good.

One who knows will not show off.

One who shows off does not know.

The wise person accumulates nothing.

The more one does for others, the more one achieves.

The more one gives to others, the more one receives.

The way of Heaven benefits by harming nothing.

The way of the wise person achieves

And receives by accumulating nothing.

Sincere words are not elegant elegant words are not sincere.

Excellence is not winning arguments winning arguments is not being Excellent.

Understanding is not wide learning wide learning is not understanding.

The Wise Person does not store up for himself. By working for others he increases what he himself possesses. By giving to others he gets increase for himself more and more.

"Heaven's Way: to benefit and not to harm." The Way of the Wise Person: to work and not contend.

True words are not necessarily exquisite. Beautiful words are not necessarily trustable.

The kind is not necessarily eloquent. The eloquent is not necessarily kind.

He who knows does not argue, but he who does not know argues.

The wise is not selfish; he acts for the good of others.

Great Tao takes care about the good of all living beings. Everything It does toward living beings does not contain violence and does not harm anyone.

That wise also acts without violence and does not harm anyone.

[
]

The Wise Person is full of honesty his words have substance.

In empty talk the honesty is missing.

Enlightenment does not come because somebody is educated,

Happiness does not come from riches.

The
Wise Person does not live for himself,

In doing good actions for others he is satisfied.

The more he gives the more he receives,

Around him there is harmony everywhere,

Being on the Tao Way he is well established in Virtue (Te).

Trustworthy
words are not fine-sounding, and fine-sounding words are not trustworthy. Good
people do not engage in disputation, and those who engage in disputation are
not good people. Those who are wise are not erudite, and those who are erudite
are not wise. The Sage does not accumulate things. Since what he does is for
the people he has more than enough for himself. Since he gives things to the
people he has even more himself. The Dao of Heaven benefits and does not injure.
The Dao of the Sage does things and does not contend.

Sincere words are not kind;

Kind words are not sincere.

One who is good will never argue;

One who argues is not good.

One who knows does not know all;

One who knows all does not know at all.

The Sage does not store things for himself.

The more one does for others,

The more he has for himself.

The more one gives to others,

The more he keeps for himself.

The Tao of heaven is to benefit others without hurting them.

The Tao of the Sage is to act without competing.

The Evolved Way

Sincere words are not embellished;

Embellished words are not sincere.

Those who are good are not defensive;

Those who are defensive are not good.

Those who know are not erudite;

Those who are erudite do not know.

Evolved Individuals do not accumulate.

The more they do for others, the more they gain;

The more they give to others, the more they possess.

The Tao of Nature

Is to serve without spoiling.

The Tao of Evolved Individuals

Is to act wihtout contending.

And finally, in the parting words of Lao Tzu, "True words are not eloquent; eloquent words are not true." Listen to the silent sage, and then forget.

[
]

As honest words may not sound fine,

Fine words may not be honest ones;

A good man does not argue, and

An arguer may not be good!

The knowers are not learned men

And learned men may never know.

The
Wise Man does not hoard his things;

Hard-pressed, from serving other men,

He has enough and some to spare;

But having given all he had,

He then is very rich indeed.

God's
Way is gain that works no harm;

The Wise Man's way, to do his work

Without contending for a crown.

Sincere words are not fine,

Fine words are not sincere.

A good man is not eloquent,

An eloquent man is not good.

He who knows does not show off his learning,

He who shows off his learning does not know.

The sage has nothing to reserve.

He gains more since he does his utmost to help others,

And gets richer since he gives all to others.

The Tao of Heaven is beneficial to all things, but not harmful.

The Tao of the sage is to compete against nobody in what he does.

[
]

Sincere words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not sincere.

Those who are good do not engage in disputation;

those who engage in disputation are not good.

Those who know are not broadly learned;

those who are broadly learned do not know.

The sage is not acquisitive.

The more he does for others, the more he himself has.

The more he gives to others, the more he himself possesses.

The Dao of Heaven is to provide benefit without doing harm.

The Dao of the sage is to act without causing contention.

1. Sincere words are not showy;

2. Showy words are not sincere.

3. Those who know are not "widely learned";

4. Those "widely learned" do not know.

5. The good do not have a lot;

6. Those with a lot are not good.

7.
The Sage accumulates nothing.

8. Having used what he had for others,

9. He has even more.

10. Having given what he had to others,

11. What he has is even greater.

12. Therefore, the Way of Heaven is to benefit and not cause any harm;

13. The Way of Man is to act on behalf of others and not to compete with them.

The truth isn't
flashy.

Flashy words aren't true.

Educated people

aren't always smart.

Smart people

don't always have an education.

Good people
don't argue.

People who argue aren't good.

The Masters
don't hang on to things.

They're always doing something

for other people,

so they always have more to give.

They give away

whatever they have,

so what they have is worth more.

If you want
to get right with Tao,

help other people, don't hurt them.

The Masters always work with people,

never against them.

.

True Words

True words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

The good do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who know are not scholarly.

The scholarly do not know.

The wise do not hoard.

The more they give to others, the more they have.

The Way of heaven sharpens but does no harm.

The Way of the wise accomplishes without striving.

© Sanderson Beck, 1996

True word is not fine fine word is not true.

He who has Tao does not quarrel.

He who has wisdom does not look for learning.

He who looks for learning has no wisdom.

The Sage does not hoard and yet has plenty.

The more he gives to others the more is bestowed on him.

The greater his sacrifice the greater his Self-possession.

That is the nature of heaven: to help without demanding.

That is the nature of the Sage: to accomplish without laboring.

[
]

The Way of Heaven

Lao Tze says,

Sincere words are not charming and charming words are not sincere.

Those who know the Tao do not like to dispute;

and the disputing persons do not know the Tao.

Wise men do not have to own vast knowledge, those with vast knowledge are not wise.

The sage doesn't like to accumulate things for himself.

The more he works for others, the more he possesses of his own;

and the more he gives to others, the more blessings he receives in return.

The way of Heaven is full of sharpness but injures no one.

The way of sages is to make an effort but to consider not the competition.

[
]

MANIFESTING SIMPLICITY

The
truth is not always beautiful,

nor beautiful words the truth.

Those
who have virtue,

have no need of argument for its own sake,

for they know that argument is of no avail.

Those
who have knowledge of the natural way

do not train themselves in cunning,

whilst those who use cunning to rule their lives,

and the lives of others,

are not knowledgeable of the Tao,

nor of natural happiness.

The
sage seeks not to have a store

of things or knowledge, for he knows,

the less of these he has, the more he has,

and that the more he gives,

the greater his abundance.

The
way of the sage is pointed

but does not harm.

The
way of the sage

is to work without cunning.

True words aren't eloquent;

eloquent words aren't true.

Wise men don't need to prove their point;

men who need to prove their point aren't wise.

The Master has no possessions.

The more he does for others,

the happier he is.

The more he gives to others,

the wealthier he is.

The Tao nourishes by not forcing.

By not dominating, the Master leads.

Here are some tantalizing excerpts from the newest computer-assisted translation of Lao Tzu's famous

TAO TE CHIP

The Way of the One and the Zero

Written by
Jeffrey Sorensen
.

With all due apology to
Stephen Mitchell
, who's translation was the basis for this, and, of course, Lao Tzu.

This document is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. The author respectfully requests that his attribution and apology be retained during reproduction.

1

The tao that can be
tar
(1)ed

is not the entire Tao.

The PATH that can be specified

is not the full PATH.

We declare the names

of all variables and functions.

Yet the Tao has no type specifier.

Dynamically binding, you realize the magic.

Statically binding, you see only the hierarchy.

Yet magic and hierarchy

arise from the same source,

and this source has a null pointer.

Reference the NULL within NULL,

it is the gateway to all wizardry.

2

When users see one GUI as beautiful,

other user interfaces become ugly.

When users see some programs as winners,

other programs become lossage.

Pointers and NULLs reference each other.

High level and assembler depend on each other.

Double and float cast to each other.

High-endian and low-endian define each other.

While and until follow each other.

Therefore the Guru

programs without doing anything

and teaches without saying anything.

Warnings arise and he lets them come;

processes are swapped and he lets them go.

He has but doesn't
chown
,

acts but doesn't
expect
.

When his work is done, he deletes it.

That is why it lasts forever.

3

When you overesteem great hackers,

more users become cretins.

When you develop encryption,

more users become crackers.

The Guru leads

by emptying user's minds

and increasing their quotas,

by weakening their ambition

and toughening their resolve.

When users lack knowledge and desire,

management will not try to interfere.

Practice not-looping,

and everything will fall into place.

4

The Tao is like a glob pattern:

used but never used up.

It is like the
extern void
:

filled with infinite possibilities.

It is masked but always present.

I don't know who built it.

It came before the first kernel.

5

The Tao doesn't take sides;

it gives birth to both wins and losses.

The Guru doesn't take sides;

she welcomes both hackers and lusers.

The Tao is like a stack:

the data changes but not the structure.

the more you use it, the deeper it becomes;

the more you talk of it, the less you understand.

Hold on to the root.

6

The Tao is called the Great Server:

empty yet inexhaustible,

it gives birth to infinite networks.

Its code is present within you.

You can apply it any way you want.

9

Fill your disk to the brim

and it will fragment.

Keep adding features to your utility

and it will become unusable.

Chase after royalties and license fees

and your heart will never unclench.

Care about a luser's approval

and you will be his prisoner.

Do your work, then logout.

The only path to serenity.

12

Graphics blind the eyes.

Audio files deafen the ear.

Mouse clicks numb the fingers.

Heuristics weaken the mind.

Options wither the heart.

The Guru observes the net

but trusts his inner vision.

He allows things to come and go.

His heart is as open as the ether.

14

more, and it can't be read.

find, and it can't be located.

grep, and it can't be scanned.

In the foreground, it isn't a hog.

In the background, it isn't idle.

Contiguous, unpatchable,

it lives below the realm of logic.

From there it includes all formulas,

an image without a viewer,

virtual, beyond all conception.

Rewind it and there is no beginning;

Fast forward and there is no end.

You can't know it, but you can be it,

at ease in your own life.

Just realize where you log from:

this is the essence of wisdom.

15

The ancient Wizards were profound and subtle.

Their wisdom was unfathomable.

There is no way to describe it;

all we can do is read their source code.

They were careful

as someone writing an unbuffered stream.

Alert as a warrior in a dangerous MUD.

Courteous as an anonymous ftp.

Fluid as a morphing face.

Shapable as an interpolated spline.

Receptive as a dialup slip connection.

Clear as a sharpened bitmap.

Do you have the patience to wait

till the broadcast storm subsides and the net is clear?

Can you mask interrupts

till the right thunk arises by itself?

The Guru doesn't seek fulfillment.

Not seeking, not throwing exceptions,

she is present, and can welcome all things.

17

When the Guru administers, the users

are hardly aware that he exists.

Next best is a sysop who is loved.

Next, one who is feared.

And worst, one who is despised.

If you don't trust the users,

you make them untrustworthy.

The Guru doesn't talk, he hacks.

When his work is done,

the users say, "Amazing:

we implemented it, all by ourselves!"

18

When the great Tao is forgotten,

standards and protocols appear.

When management makes initiatives,

the great pretense begins.

When there is no peace in the newsgroup,

bigots spread their theology.

When the system becomes fragmented,

Holy Wars are born.

19

Throw away documentation and manuals,

and users will be a hundred times happier.

Throw away privileges and quotas,

and users will do the Right Thing.

Throw away proprietary and site licenses,

and there won't be any pirating.

If these three aren't enough,

just stay at your home directory

and let all processes take their course.

30

Whoever relies on the Tao in administrating

doesn't try force issues

or defeat enemies by revoking privilages.

For every hack there is a counterhack.

Flaming, even with a good intention,

will only bring flames in return.

The Guru does his job

and then signs off.

He understands that the net

is forever beyond his control,

and that trying to dominate events

goes against the current of the Tao.

Because he believes in himself,

he doesn't try to convince others.

Because he is content with himself,

he doesn't need others' approval.

Because he accepts himself,

the whole net accepts him.

32

The Tao can't be perceived.

Smaller than an bit,

it contains uncountable files.

If powerful men and women

could remain centered in the Tao,

all things would be harmony.

The net would become a paradise.

All users would be at peace,

and the standards would be

those written in their hearts.

When you have versions and releases,

know that they are provisional.

When you have consortia,

know where their functions should end.

Knowing when to stop,

you can avoid any danger.

All things end in the Tao

as sendmail flows into the net.

36

If you want to compress something,

you must first pkunzip it.

If you want to get rid of a virus,

you must first allow it to flourish.

If you want to get() something,

you must first allow it to be put() .

This is called the subtle perception

of the way things are.

Soft mounting overcomes the hard error.

Brute force overcomes the heuristic.

Let your algorithms remain a mystery.

Just show users the results.

40

The return is the function of the Tao.

Responding is the way of the Tao.

All things begin as source code.

Source code begins with an empty file.

42

The Tao gives birth to One.

One gives birth to One Zero.

One Zero gives birth to One One.

One One gives birth to all things.

All things have their backs to the input

and stand facing the output.

When output and input combine,

all things achieve harmony.

Ordinary users hate solitude.

But the Guru makes use of it,

embracing his aloneness, realizing

he is one with cyberspace.

43

A tiny bug in a trivial routine

will overcome a moby system.

That which has no fee

enters where there is no market space.

This shows the value of "AS IS."

Teaching without manuals,

performing without commands:

that is the Guru's way.

46

When a system is in harmony with the Tao,

the compiler makes applications and utilities.

When a system goes counter to the Tao,

accounting logs fill the root directory.

There is no greater illusion than fear,

no greater wrong than in preparing to defend yourself,

no greater misfortune than having an enemy.

Whoever can see through all fear

will always be safe.

47

Without opening a graphics window,

you can open your soul to the net.

Without looking away from the console,

you can see the essence of the Tao.

The more files you access,

the less you hack.

The Guru accesses without protocols,

finds his man pages without keywords,

optimizes without compiling.

48

In the pursuit of knowledge,

every day something is appended.

In the practice of the Tao,

every day something is truncated.

Less and less do you need to force things,

until finally you arrive at non-looping.

When nothing is done,

nothing is left undone.

True wizardry can be gained

by letting things go their own way.

It can't be gained by interrupting.

49

The Guru has no mind of her own.

She works with the mind of the users.

She is good to users who are good.

She is also good to users who aren't good.

This is TRUE goodness.

She trusts users who are trustworthy.

She also trusts users who aren't trustworthy.

This is TRUE trust.

The Guru's mind is like free space.

Users don't understand her.

They look to her and wait.

She treats them like child processes.

54

Whoever is planted in the Tao

will not have their account revoked.

Whoever embraces the Tao

will not become obsolete.

Their .signatures will be met with honor

from generation to generation.

Let the Tao be present in your home

and you will become genuine.

Let it be present in your group

and your group will flourish.

Let it be present in your system

and your system will be an example

to all the systems in the net.

Let it be present in cyberspace

and all cyberspace will sync.

How do I know this is true?

By accessing myself.

60

Administering a large system

is like frying a small fish.

You spoil it with too much poking.

Center your system in the Tao

and lossage will have no power.

Not that it isn't there,

but you will be able to step out of its way.

Give lossage nothing to oppose

and it will disappear by itself.

68

The best MUD player

wants his opponents berserking.

The best consortium partner

lauds the products of his competitor.

The best corporate rep

serves the communal good.

The best sysop

follows the will of the users.

All of them embody

the virtue of non-contention.

Not that they don't love to compete,

but they do it with the spirit of hack-and-slay.

In this they are like wannabees

and congruent with the Tao.

70

My teachings are easy to grok

and easy to include in your programs.

Yet your neural net will never grasp them,

and if you try to code them, you'll fail.

My teachings are older than the net.

How can you grep their meaning?

If you want to know me,

look to your kernel.

71

Not-knowing is true knowledge.

Presuming to know is a bug.

First realize that you are broken;

then you can move toward perfection.

The Guru is her own debugger.

She has flushed herself of all knowing.

Thus she is truly whole.

72

When they lose their sense of awe,

users turn to religious wars.

When they no longer trust themselves,

they begin to depend upon the authorities.

Therefore the Guru steps back

so that users won't be confused.

He teaches without instructions,

so that users will have nothing to learn.

73

The Tao is always at ease.

It computes without grinding,

answers without outputing a word,

switches without being signaled,

continues without a program.

It accesses all cyberspace.

And though it spans many volumes,

is doesn't drop any bytes.

74

If you realize that all code changes,

there is nothing you should try to archive.

If you aren't afraid of hard drive failure,

there is nothing you can't achieve.

Trying to control the future

is like trying to debug a running kernel.

When you try to debug the system's kernel,

chances are you'll panic and crash.

75

When license fees are too high,

users do things by hand.

When the management is too intrusive,

users lose their spirit.

Hack for the user's benefit.

Trust them; leave them alone.

79

Failure is an opportunity.

If you blame another user,

there is no end to the blame.

Therefore the Guru

fulfills her own obligations

and debugs her own code.

She hacks what she needs to do

and demands nothing of her coworkers.

80

If a system is administered wisely,

its users will be content.

They enjoy hacking their code

and don't waste time implementing

labor-saving shell scripts.

Since they dearly love their accounts,

they aren't interested in other machines.

There may be telnet, rlogin, and ftp,

but these don't access any hosts.

There may be an arsenal of cracks and malware,

but nobody ever uses them.

People enjoy reading their mail,

take pleasure in being with their newsgroups,

spend weekends working at their terminals,

delight in the doings at the site.

And even though the next system is so close

that users can hear its keys clicking and biff beeps,

they are content to die of old age

without ever having gone to see it.

Truth is not beautiful;

and beauty is not true.

One who is right may not argue;

and one who argues may not be right.

One who knows the special may not know the general;

and one who knows the general may not know the special.

Thus, a Sage ruler never concentrated his wealth:

What has been done for others makes him feel even better himself.

What has been distributed to others makes him feel richer himself.

Dao of Nature is to benefit and is not to injure.

Dao of a Sage ruler is to serve, and is not aggressive.

[
]

Trustworthy words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not trustworthy.

The knower does not know everything.

The know-it-all knows nothing.

Kindness is not overindulgent.

Overindulgence is not kind.

The sage does not collect.

As soon as he exists for others, he has more.

As soon as he gives to others, he has more.

So the Tao of heaven benefits and does not harm.

The Tao of humankind exists and does not compete.

LXXXI

It
is one thing to speak elegantly and another to speak sincerely

Knowledge and insight are different things

The first accumulates fine distinctions, precise statements

And the other, well, it sees all as essentially the same

Whoever
follows the way hoards nothing

Life is too long a journey to carry excess weight

He uses what he has for others

And finds his spirit lighter and his heart enriched

The
tao sustains all without fear of exhaustion

And virtue lies in letting it.

True Words Are Not Beautiful

True words are not beautiful,

beautiful words are not true.

The good are not argumentative,

the argumentative are not good.

Knowers do not generalize,

generalists do not know.

Sages do not accumulate anything

but give everything to others,

having more the more they give.

The Way of heaven

helps and does not harm.

The Way for humans

is to act without contention.

Credible words are not sweet; sweet words are not credible.

Honest people do not need to argue for themselves; those who argue for themselves are not honest.

Experts have deep knowledge about their specialties; those who try to learn everything would know little about each.

Sages never accumulate wealth.

They believe the more they give up, the more they have;

And the more they give away, the more they accumulate.

Tao of the Nature is this: benefiting without harming.

Tao of People is this: achieving without rivaling.

[
]

Sincere words are not beautiful; beautiful words are not sincere.

Good men are not argumentative, the argumentative are not good.

One who knows is not erudite; the erudite one does not know.

The sage does not take to hoarding.

The more he lives for others, the fuller is his life.

The more he gives, the more he abounds.

The Way of Heaven benefits and does not harm.

The Way of the sage works and does not compete with anyone.

[
]

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are often not truthful.

Good man do not argue.

Those who argue are not good.

Those who know, do not know everything.

Those who know everything, do not know.

The sage never tries to store things up.

The more he does for others, the more he has.

The more he gives to others, the greater his abundance.

Tao of heaven benefits, not harms.

Tao of the sage is working without claiming.

Sincere words are not elegant;

elegant words are not sincere.

The good person does not argue;

the person who argues is not good.

The wise do not have great learning;

those with great learning are not wise.

True
Persons do not hoard.

Using all they have for others, they still have more.

Giving all they have to others, they are richer than before.

The
way of heaven is to benefit and not to harm.

The way of the True Reason is to assist without striving

in the unfolding of the story of the earth.

True
words are not pleasant to hear

sweet-sounding words are not true.

Good people do not prove things by argument

those who prove things by argument are not good.

Wisdom
is different from book learning

book learning means little wisdom.

Wise
people have no need to store things up

when all has been given to others

they have more than before.

The
path of the universe

is to attain the end

without means

do

without acting.

True words hardly sound fine. Nice words are far from always true.

A good man seldom proves by argument; he hardly argues. He who argues or proves
by argument is hardly so good (as non-argumentative good men). Who argues [blatantly]
is hardly (ever) a good man.

[All this is "Lao" arguing, debating or clowning.]

Brilliant
wisdom is different from sordid learning. Much bookish learning can mean too
little wisdom. Who has extensive knowledge is hardly a wise man.

The
wise man has no need to hoard for himself. He lives for other people, seemingly,
and grows richer himself if the more he uses for others, the more he has for
himself - He gives to other people to get greater abundance.

Heaven's
way is to sharpen and bless, all free from harm of cutting,

And the wise man's way is to act and accomplish without contending or striving.

Sincere words are not beautiful,

Beautiful words are not sincere.

He who knows is not learned,

He who is learned does not know.

He who is good does not have much,

He who has much is not good.

The sage does not hoard.

The more he does for others,

the more he has himself;

The more he gives to others,

the more his own bounty increases.

Therefore,

The Way of heaven benefits but does not harm,

The Way of man acts but does not contend.

Sincere words are not grand.

Grand words are not faithful.

The man of Tao does not dispute.

Those who know it are not learned.

The learned do not know it.

The wise man does not lay up treasure.

The more he expends on others, the more he gains for himself.

The more he gives to others, the more he has for his own.

This is the Tao of Heaven, which penetrates but does not injure.

This is the Tao of the wise man, who acts but does not strive.

[
]

You Do Not Need Words to Prove Your Love

You do not need words

to prove your love.

The proof lies in simple actions.

Listening with attention,

seeing with acceptance,

touching with tenderness,

this is the way of the Tao.

I know the great mystery of love

and the overarching Tao

can be trusted.

I know this not because of any words.

I know it because I touched it

when I first touched Nancy's hand.

No matter what happens,

trust the power of your love.

All will be well.

[
]

True words are not beautiful; Beautiful words are not true.

A good man does not argue; He who argues is not a good man.

A wise man has no extensive knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man.

The sage does not accumulate for himself. The more he uses for others, the more he possesses of his own.

The Way of Heaven is to benefit others and not to injure. The Way of the sage is to act but not to compete.

Real words are
not vain,

Vain words not real;

And since those who argue prove nothing

A sensible man does not argue.

A sensible man is wiser than he knows,

While a fool knows more than is wise.

Therefore a sensible man does not devise resources:

The greater his use to others

The greater their use to him,

The more he yields to others

The more they yield to him.

The way of life cleaves without cutting:

Which, without need to say,

Should be man's way.

-------------------------------------------

LAOTZU

"The way to do is to be."

LEGENDS as to Laotzu
are more or less familiar.

Immaculately conceived
by a shooting star, carried in his mother's womb for sixty-two years and born,
it is said, white-haired, in 604 B.C., he became in due time keeper of imperial
archives at Loyang, an ancient capital in what is now the Chinese province of
Honan.

Speaking wisdom
which attracted followers, he had refused to the end of his life to set it down:
considering the way of life and the ways of the world, he had decided that a
great deal was done and said in the world which might better be spared. His
choice, however, was not, as has been widely assumed, vacant inaction or passive
contemplation. It was creative quietism. Though he realized the fact that action
can be emptier than in-action, he was no more than Walt Whitman a believer in
abstention from deed. He knew that a man can be a doer without being an actor
and by no means banned being of use when he said that "the way to do is
to be,'

Twenty-five centuries
before Whitman, he knew the value of loafing and inviting one's soul; and the
American poet, whether or not consciously, has been in many ways one of the
Chinese poet's more eminent Western disciples, as Thoreau has been also, with
his tenet, "Be it life or death, we seek only reality." But Whitman
and Thoreau loved written words, whereas Laotzu felt that written words by defining,
by limiting, could have dubious effects. Aware of the dangers inherent in dogma,
he was reluctant to leave a set record of his own spoken belief, lest it become
to followers an outer and formal rather than an inner and natural faith, an
out-side authority rather than intuition. He laid down no rigid laws for behavior:
men's conduct should depend on their instinct and conscience. His last wish
would have been to create other men in his own image; but he gently continued
in life, by example presumably and by spoken word, suggesting to his neighbors
and his emperor how natural, easy and happy a condition it is for men to be
members of one another.

How do I know this
integrity?

Because it could all begin in me.

One who recognizes
all men as members of his own body

Is a sound man to guard them.

Legendary or true,
it is told that Confucius, impressed by Laotzu's influence on people, visited
him once to ask advice, ironically enough, on points of ceremonial etiquette.
Baffled by the answers of the older man, to whom etiquette meant hypocrisy and
nonsense, Confucius returned to his disciples and told them:

"Of birds I know that they have wings to fly with, of fish that they have
fins to swim with, of wild beasts that they have feet to run with. For feet
there are traps, for fins nets, for wings arrows. But who knows how dragons
surmount wind and cloud into heaven? This day I have seen Laotzu and he is a
dragon."

The end of the
life legend is that, saddened by men's tragic perversity, their indisposition
to accept "the way of life," to use life with natural goodness, with
serene and integral respect, Laotzu rode away alone on a water-buffalo into
the desert beyond the boundary of civilization, the great wall of his period.
It is narrated that when he arrived at one of its gates, a warden there, Yin
Hsi, who had had a dream of the sage's coming, recognized him from the dream
and persuaded him to forgo his reluctance and to record the principles of his
philosophy. The result is said to have been the Tao Teh Ching, Tao meaning the
way of all life, the fit use of life by men and Ching a text or classic. And
from the gate-house or from somewhere, this testament of man's fitness in the
universe, this text of five thousand words, comprising eighty-one sayings, many
of them in verse, has come down through the centuries.

In written history
there is little basis for these legends. Record of the philosopher appears first-
a brief account ending, "No one knows where he died" in the annals
of Ssu Ma Ch'ien, born five hundred years after Laotzu; and some Western scholars,
like some of their Eastern predecessors, have believed that long-lived Laotzu
was a myth and that the sayings attributed to him were a compilation of the
sayings of a number of men who lived during the next two or three hundred years.

Gowen and Hall
in their Outline History of China say that the Tao Teh Ching "is very probably
the work of a later age, perhaps of the second century B.C., but is generally
regarded as containing many of the sayings of the sage." In an essay accompanying
the Buddhist-minded translation by Wai-tao and Dwight Goddard, Dr. Kiang Kang-hu
is more specific. "Three Taoist sages," he writes, "who lived
two or three hundred or more years apart, according to history, are commonly
believed to be the same man, who by his wisdom had attained longevity...

The simpler and
more probable solution of the confusion is to accept the historicity of all
three but to give credit for the original writing to Laotzu and consider the
others as able disciples and possibly editors. The book in its present form
might not have been written until the third century B.C.... for it was engraved
on stone tablets soon after that time." It might, he thinks, have contained
verses by later Taoists "without detracting from the larger credit that
belongs to Laotzu."

The earliest known
manuscript dates from the T'ang Dynasty, a thousand years later. In A Criticism
of Some Recent Methods of Dating Laotzu, Dr. Hu Shih has shown that the methods
of internal evidence used to impugn the authenticity of Laotzu's writings might
have cast similar doubt on the writings of Confucius or of almost anyone. Mark
Twain's comment that Hamlet was written by Shakespeare or by some one else of
the same name is pertinent. The Tao Teh Ching is a book, an important and coherent
book; and its value comes not from the outward identity or iden-tities but from
the inward and homogeneous identity of whoever wrote it.

More relevant is
a divergence of judgment as to the book's value. Herbert Giles, the able, pioneering
British sinophile, tender toward Confucian orthodoxy and finding in Laotzu "direct
antagonism to it," wrote in his Chinese Literature published at the turn
of the century that "scant allusion would have been made" to the Tao
Teh Ching, "were it not for the attention paid to it by several more or
less eminent foreign students of the language."

Perhaps pedantic
Giles was annoyed by the fact that Laotzu could speak of scholars as a corrupting
nuisance. Other scholars more imaginative than Giles have differed with him;
and current tendency gives the mystical ethics of Laotzu a surer place in import
for the world than the practical proprieties of Confucius. Certainly Tao has
had profound influence on a great part of the world's population. Apart from
the superstitious and the misled who have taken over the name for religious
sects and have perverted its meaning into alchemy, geomancy, occultism, church
tricks generally, a majority in the Oriental world has been fundamentally informed
by Taoist quietism, whether or not they realize the source of the patience,
forbearance and fortitude which characterize them.

Not only has Laotzu's
creative quietism been the foundation of China's age-long survival; what was
originally good in Japanese Chintziest has also derived from him. And the Western
world might well temper its characteristic faults by taking Laotzu to heart.

Herrymon Maurer
in a postscript to The Old Fellow, his fictional portrait of Laotzu, notes how
closely the way of life according to Laotzu relates to the principles of democracy.
Maurer is right that democracy cannot be a successful general practice unless
it is first a true individual conviction. Many of us in the West think ourselves
believers in democracy if we can point to one of its fading flowers even while
the root of it in our own lives is gone with worms. No one in history has shown
better than Laotzu how to keep the root of democracy clean. Not only democracy
but all of life, he points out, grows at one's own doorstep. Maurer says, "Laotzu
is one of our chief weapons against tanks, artillery and bombs." I agree
that no one has bettered the ancient advice:

"Conduct your
triumph as a funeral."

"In this life,"
reflected Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough in an eighteenth-century letter to her
granddaughter, "I am satisfied there is nothing to be done but to make
the best of what cannot be helped, to act with reason oneself and with a good
conscience. And though that will not give all the joys some people wish for,
yet it will make one very quiet." Laotzu's quietism is nothing but the
fundamental sense commonly inherent in mankind, a common-sense so profound in
its simplicity that it has come to be called mysticism. Mysticism or not, it
seems to me the straightest, most logical explanation as yet advanced for the
continuance of life, the most logical use yet advised for enjoying it.

While most of us,
as we use life, try to open the universe to ourselves, Laotzu opens himself
to the universe. If the views of disciples or commentators have sifted into
his text, the original intent and integrity shine through nonetheless. All the
deadening paraphernalia wished on him by priests and scholars cannot hide him.
He remains as freshly and as universally alive as childhood. Followers of most
religions or philosophies, feeling called upon to follow beyond reason, follow
only a little way. Laotzu's logical, practical suggestions are both reasonable
and simple.

However, if metaphysical
or scholarly terms seem necessary for understanding, Dr. I. W. Heysinger relates
Laotzu's basic concept to that of Roames, Darwin's pupil and co-worker: "the
integrating principle of the whole-- the Spirit, as it were, of the universe
-- instinct with contrivance, which flows with purpose" and to the philosophy
of Lamarck. I myself have found Socrates and Plato in it, Marcus Aurelius and
Tolstoi. More modernly it is at the heart of Mrs. Eddy's doctrines or of Bergson's
creative evolution. Many a contemporary cult would do well to stop fumbling
at the edges of Tao, to forget its priests who invented the ouija board and
to go to its center.

Concerned with
this center, Dr. Lin Yutang says in The Wisdom of India and China: "If
there is one book in the whole of Oriental literature which should be read above
all the others, it is, in my opinion, Laotzu's Book of Tao . . . It is one of
the profoundest books in the world's philosophy. . . profound and clear, mystic
and practical."

He says this in
the preface to his own English version of The Book of Tao. I had hoped that
this version would be enough clearer than others in English to explain for me
the influence of Laotzu on many of the T'ang poets, with whom I had become acquainted
through Dr. Kiang Kang-hu's literal texts. With all admiration for Dr. Lin's
Chinese spirit and English prose, I found myself little better satisfied with
his presentation of Laotzu in Western free verse than I have been with other
English versions, most of which have seemed to me dry and stiff, pompous and
obscure. And that is why I have been led to make my own version.

Though I cannot
read Chinese, two years spent in China and eleven years of work with Dr. Kiang
in translating The Jade Mountain have given me a fair sense of the "spirit
of the Chinese people" and an assiduity in finding English equivalents
for idiom which literal translation fails to convey. And now, through various
and varying English versions of the Tao Teh Ching I have probed for the meaning
as I recognize it and have persistently sought for it the clearest and simplest
English expression I could discover. Above all I have been prompted by hope
to acquaint Western readers with the heart of a Chinese poet whose head has
been too much studied.

I have used, incidentally
even when I quote in this preface from those who use other orthography, the
spellings Laotzu and Tao Teh Ching as preferable for the English or American
ear and eye. And perhaps I shall be taken to task for using two or three times
an unorthodox interpretation of text. But might not Laotzu's expression, for
example, to "stand below other people," usually translated to "humble
oneself below them," have been an ancient origin of our own word, "to
understand"?

"There can
be little doubt," says Walter Gorn Old, "that any translation from
the Chinese is capable of extreme flexibility and license, of which, indeed
the translator must avail himself if he would rightly render the spirit rather
than the letter of the text; and the spirit, after all, is the essential thing,
if we follow the teaching of Laotzu. It is safe to say that the more literal
the translation may be the more obscure its meaning." Some of the Tao Teh
Ching sayings, I am told, jingle repetitively with a surface lightness like
that of nursery rhymes; and I have now and then ventured such effects, besides
using rhyme whenever it felt natural to the sense and stayed by the text. Dr.
Heysinger, deft and honest though his version is, sometimes lets the exactions
of prosody dilate and dilute his writing. Dr. Lin Yutang's faithfulness, on
the other hand, like Arthur Waley's, stays by expressions significant to Eastern
but not to Western readers; and Laotzu should, I am convinced, be brought close
to people in their own idiom, as a being beyond race or age.

As to other translations,
Walter Gorn Old's has been popular in England and its comparatively direct wording
is accompanied by brief friendly essays of both Buddhist and Christian tinge,
Arthur Waley's is painstakingly accurate and scholarly but difficult for any
but scholars to follow, and there are several which are over-colored with Buddhism.
Despite some fourteen offerings, and despite the fact that "the wording
of the original," according to Dr. Lionel Giles, keeper of Oriental manuscripts
in the British Museum, "is ex-traordinarily vigorous and terse," Westerners
have not yet in my judgment, been given a sufficiency intelli-gible version
of Laotzu. Now that East and West have met, I suspect that every coming generation
of Westemers will, in its own turn, in its own preferred words, try to express
Laotzu's conception of the way. and use of life. Though he himself said that
words cannot express existence, he himself trespassed into them for his own
generation.

Together with this
absence of a forthright and congenial English translation, there are two other
principal reasons why Laotzu has not as yet endeared himself to many Westerners.
As religion on the one hand, as philosophy on the other, Taoism has been adulterated
and implicated by its Oriental adherents. "The Taoist religion," writes
Dr. Kiang, "is an abuse of Taoist philosophy. We find nothing essentially
in common between them and, in many respects, they are conflicting." He
elaborates upon this abuse, as he might have done upon ecclesiastical abuse
of the philosophy of Jesus; but he does not, in my Occidental judgment, sufficiently
emphasize the disservice done Laotzu by academicians. As the master himself
said of the sensible man he commended,

The cultured might
call him heathenish,

This man of few words, because his one care

Is not to interfere but to let nature restore

The sense of direction most men ignore,

and as he said
also,

False teachers
of the way of life use flowery words

And start nonsense.

Even Laotzu's most
famous disciple, Chuangtzu, playfully complicated his master's firm, calm teaching;
and the do-nothing idea has been so stressed a misreading as to alienate or
puzzle many a Westerner who, seeing Laotzu steadily and whole, would have understood
him and responded. Quakers, for instance, would be better Quakers for knowing
Tao. Not all Westerners are natural addicts of the strenuous life.

But finally Dr.
Kiang is right. Worse than the disservice done the sensible master by some of
his scholarly followers has been the wrong done him by the religionists who
have preempted him.

Laotzu knew that
organization and institution interfere with a man's responsibility to himself
and therefore with his proper use of life, that the more any outside authority
interferes with a man's use of life and the less the man uses it according to
his own instinct and conscience, the worse for the man and the worse for society.
The only authority is "the way of life" itself; a man's sense of it
is the only priest or prophet. And yet, as travelers have seen Taoism in China,
it is a cult compounded of devils and derelicts, a priest-ridden clutter of
superstitions founded on ignorance and fear. As an organized religion, its initial
and main sect having been established in the first century A.D. by a Pope named
Chang Ta-lin, Taoism has even less to do with its founder than most cults have
to do with the founders from whom they profess derivation. Even in modern China
a Taoist papacy is paid to exorcize demons out of rich homes.

To symbolize the
patches of a beggar's cloak in Buddhistic ritual, fine brocades are cut into
squares and then pieced together again in aesthetically broken design; Christ's
cross has been made the pattern for palatial temples; and Laotzu's faith in
the naturally and openly beneficent flow of life has been distorted into a commanding
but hidden breath of dragons, his simple delighted awareness of the way of life
has been twisted into a quest for the philosopher's stone. Thus men love to
turn the simplest and most human of their species into complex and superhuman
beings; thus everywhere men yearn to be misled by magicians; thus priests and
cults in all lands and under virtuous guise make of ethics a craft and a business.

Confucius had the
wisdom to forbid that a religion be based on his personality or codes; and his
injunction against graven images has fared better than a similar injunction
in the Ten Commandments. Hence Confucians continues unchanged as a realistic
philosopher, an early pragmatist, while Laotzu and Jesus, his ethical fellows,
have been tampered with by prelates, have been more and more removed from human
living and relegated as mystics to a supernatural world.

Confucius prescribed
formalized rather than spontaneous conduct for the development of superior men
in their relation not only to the structure of society but to themselves. Laotzu,
with little liking for organized thought or recruited action, no final faith
in any authority but the authority of the heart, suggests that if those in charge
of human affairs would act on instinct and conscience there would be less and
less need of organized authority for governing people or, at any rate --and
here he is seen as the realist he remains, as a man aware of necessarily gradual
steps-- less need for "superior men" to show.

In our own time
we have had evidence of the tragic effects of showy authority. In this dislike
of show, rather than in any fundament of ethics, lay most of what Giles considered
Laotzu's "direct antagonism" to Confucian orthodoxy. The trouble was
that Confucius so ritualized his ethical culture that conduct of life took on
forms similar to those of religion, whereas Laotzu spurned both religious and
civil ceremony as misleading and harmful spectacle, his faith and conduct depending
upon no outward prop but upon inner accord with the conscience of the universe.

Faith of this sort
is true mysticism. Yet nothing could be further from the realistic core of Laotzu's
way of life than Wilder Hobson's description of it as "that great mystical
doctrine which holds that by profound, solitary meditation men may obtain knowledge
of the Absolute."

Laotzu was concerned,
as man must ever be, with the origin and meaning of life but knew and declared
that no man's explanation 0£ it is absolute. His book opens,

Existence is beyond
the power of words

To define,

Terms may be used

But are none of them absolute.

In at all considering
the origin of life he was a mystic, as anyone must be, theist or atheist, who
ventures either positive or negative guess concerning what is beyond the mind
of man to know; and insofar as Laotzu's sayings probe this region he differed
again from Confucius who, contentedly agnostic, restricted his philosophy to
known nature and empirical bound. Laotzu, on the other hand, fused mysticism
and pragmatism into a philosophy as realistic as that of Confucius but sweetened
by the natural and sufficient intuition of rightness with which he believed
all men to be endowed and by which he be-lieved all men could discover their
lives to be peaceful, useful and happy.

He was by no means
the solitary, uneighborly hermit, occult with meditation. He was as natural,
as genial, as homely as Lincoln. Having a sense of proportion, he had a sense
of humor and, as much as any man who has lived, was the everlasting neighbor.
At least this is my reading of him from the one record by which he may be appraised.

It is worthy of
note, moreover, that his philosophy anticipated and contained the humanitarian
philosophies which have succeeded it, conflicting with none of them, deepening
them all. It is a fair guess that neither the great Indian nor the great Jew
would have found anything unacceptable in Laotzu's mystical uses, which have
been made no more mystical by the one, no more useful by the other. Connecting
not only mystically but practically with the springs and ends of our action,
our thought, our being, it is a fundamental expression of everything in the
heart and mind of men which respects, enjoys and serves the individual good
by respecting, enjoying and serving the common good.

Though without
the help this time of Dr. Kiang, who is beyond reach in China, and though mindful
of Arthur Waley's distinction between scriptural and historical translation,
I wait no longer to offer my reading of a poet whom I trust other readers will
find with me to be neither occult nor complex but open and simple, neither pontifical
nor archaic but lay and current, in his calm human stature.

Witter Bynner

Chapala, Jalisco, Mexico,

June 15, 1944.

Credible words do not sound pretty, pretty words are not credible.

A nice person is not good at arguing, a person who is good at arguing is not nice.

A person who has real knowledge does not show off,

A person who shows off does not have real knowledge.

Great men do not accumulate things for themselves.

The more they do for others, the more they have,

The more they give to others, the more they get.

The law of the heavens is to benefit everything without harming it,

The law of great men is to do things for the world without fighting for the credit.

[
]

Truthful words are not always beautiful.

Beautiful words are not always truthful.

Virtuous people do not argue at all.

Non-virtuous people argue incessantly.

Those who know are not full of information.

Those who are full of information do not know.

The sage does not hoard material goods.

The more he lives entirely for others, the richer his life becomes.

The more he gives to others, the more abundant his life becomes.

The way of Heaven is to benefit all but to harm none.

The way of the sage is to work for all but to contend with none.

[
]

Truthful words are not beautiful.

Beautiful words are not truthful.

Good words are not eloquent.

Eloquent words are not good.

One who knows will not show off.

One who shows off does not know.

The wise person accumulates nothing.

The more one does for others, the more one achieves.

The more one gives to others, the more one receives.

The way of Heaven benefits by harming nothing.

The way of the wise person achieves

And receives by accumulating nothing.

Truth is not spoken with rhetoric;

rhetoric does not embrace truth.

The good do not quarrel; those who quarrel are not good.

Those who know are not widely learned, those who are widely learned do not know.

The sage does not hoard for himself. The more he does to help others, the more he can do.

The more he gives to others the more his own treasures increase.

The way of Heaven is to cause benefit, not harm.

Therefore the sage observes this and imitates it.

He acts, serves, and does without relentless striving.

