===== Chapter 59 =====

[In] governing the people and serving Heaven

There is nothing like thriftiness.

Only thriftiness is rightly called "yielding beforehand."

Yielding beforehand

Entails [one's] arrival at a hard-won accumulation of virtue.

[With this] hard-won accumulation of virtue

[There is] necessarily nothing not overcome.

[When] nothing is not overcome

[There is] necessarily no one who knows your limits.

[When] there are none who know your limits

[You] can therefore have a kingdom.

[When you] have the mother of the kingdom

[You] can thereby endure for a long time.

This is called "deeply rooted"

"A solid foundation."

The way of long life and lasting vision.

Governing people and serving heaven Is like living off the land.

Living sparingly and responding quickly Means accumulating Te. There is nothing that cannot be overcome. There is no limit.

You can become the country And the country's mother, and nourish and extend it.

This is called deep roots, firm base. This is the Tao of living long and seeing far.

While ruling the people

And serving heaven

Build up a store.

If you've built up a store

You can adhere to Tao early.

If you've adhered to Tao early

You can amass virtue.

When you've amassed virtue

There is nothing you cannot do.

When there is nothing you cannot do

Your capacity has no bounds.

Having boundless capacity

You're ready to rule the realm.

Leaning on the mother of the realm

You can last through all time.

You've been firmly established.

You have a strong support.

This is the Tao of long life.

This is the Tao of farsightedness.

VITAL ENERGY

Establishing a reserve of vital energy, A precious Ch'i -

Heaven may be well served.

So doing -

Permits return to the essence of life,

In turn, nourishing and increasing an abundance of Te.

Now,

Overcoming all difficulty -

Gaining infinite capacity -

Being beyond all limitations -

Suitability for leading and serving nations is achieved.

Holding to the Tao, the government of nations may endure.

Having a firm foundation, Deeply rooted, abundantly strong,

The Tao of long life and durable vision is achieved.

Heaven governs humanity's affairs and resembles the harvest.

For this reason the master is frugal and is correct to call for morning clothes.

Morning clothes show the importance of accumulating soulful experiences.

The important accumulation of soulful experiences emulates emptiness.

It does not control.

Emptiness that does not control follows no one.

Experiencing this is the highest.

Not experiencing this causes the emergence of rulers, the emergence of kingdoms.

The mother is able to long endure which shows a deep foundation.

The strengthened foundation increases life and brings an enduring recognition of the Tao.

WARDING THE TAO

.

To balance our earthly nature and cultivate our heavenly nature, tread

the Middle Path.

This
Middle Path alone leadeth to the Timely Return to the True Nature.

This Timely Return resulteth from the constant gathering of Magick

Powers. With that Gathering cometh Control. This Control we know

to be without Limit and he who knoweth the Limitless may rule the state.

He
who possesseth the Tao continueth long. He is like a plant with well-

set roots and strong stems. Thus it secureth long continuance of its

life.

For regulating the human (in our constitution) and rendering the (proper)service to the heavenly, there is nothing like moderation. It is only bythis moderation that there is effected and early return (to man's normalstate). That early return is what I call the repeated accumulation of theattributes (of the Tao). With that repeated accumulation of those attributes,there comes the subjugation we know not what shall be the limit; and whenone knows not what the limit shall be, he may be the ruler of a state.He who possesses the mother of the state may continue long. His case islike that (of the plant) of which we say that its roots are deep and itsflower stalks firm; -this is the way to secure that its enduring life shalllong be seen.

To get mankind to live in peace requires a full detachment

Because only one who is detached knows how to live truthfully

Letting go of everything before dying makes one live righteously

One who lives righteously knows no trouble

For one who knows no trouble, life is unbounded

One who is unbounded, considers the world as his home

One who feels united with creation, lives happily ever after

Then you'll be rooted again and you'll stand firmly

Only like that will you live happily ever after and understand everything

In managing men or anything else, the intelligent man uses self-restraint. Only by self-restraint can one forestall trouble.

Forestalling trouble strengthens one's position. Such strengthened position enables one to withstand everything. Withstanding everything, one remains unchallenged.

Being unchallenged, one governs easily. Because he embodies Mother Nature within himself, he retains a sound position.

This is the way to be deeply rooted and firmly based, And durable and long-lived.

You cannot rule men nor serve heaven unless you have laid up a store;

This "laying up a store" means quickly absorbing,

And "quickly absorbing" means doubling one's garnered "power".

Double your garnered power and it acquires a strength that nothing can overcome.

If there is nothing it cannot overcome, it know no bounds,

And only what knows no bounds is huge enough to keep a whole kingdom in its grasp.

But only he who having the kingdom goes to the Mother can keep it long.

This is called the art of making the roots strike deep by fencing the trunk,

Of making life long by fixed staring.

In leading people and serving heaven,

nothing surpasses humility.

Humility is having no preferences.

Humility accumulates virtue.

Where virtue accumulates, nothing is impossible.

When nothing is impossible, there are no limits.

A man without limits is fit to rule the realm.

The mother of the realm is everlasting.

This is called being deeply rooted.

Timeless awareness of Tao.

(In) governing people (or) serving heaven

There is nothing quite like economy

Only one who is thrifty

May be deemed ahead of the task

To be ahead of the task suggests there is

a great reserve of character

Given a great reserve of character

then nothing is impossible

When nothing is impossible

then nobody knows things to be limited

Nobody knowing things to be limited

is fit to claim the realm

(Now) claiming the realm's mother

is fitness to endure a long time

This describes deep roots & solid foundations

The path of long life & enduring vision

Restraint

For ordering humanity and serving Heaven,

Nothing is so good as being sparing.

For only if you are sparing can you,

Therefore, early submit to The Way.

Early submission - This is called

To repeatedly accumulate Virtue

If you repeatedly accumulate Virtue,

Then there is nothing you cannot overcome.

When there is nothing you cannot overcome,

No one knows where it will end,

You can possess the state.

And when you possess the mother of the state,

You can last a very long time.

This is called having deep roots

and a firm base.

It is the Way of long life and long-lasting vision.

In governing people and serving heaven, there is nothing better than moderation.

To be moderate is to follow Tao without straying. To follow Tao without straying is to become filled with good energy. To be filled with good energy is to overcome all things. To overcome all things is to know that all things are possible.

She who knows that all things are possible is fit to govern people.

Because she is one with the mother, her roots go deep, her foundation stands firm, her life lasts long, her vision endures.

In helping others, be like the sky:

Without the slightest sense of sacrifice,

It readily yields the elements

That make the harvest possible.

Reflecting nurturance is called

Continual nourishment of the harvest.

Continual nourishment arises from Modesty,

Which is the most bountiful harvest of all.

Modesty in abundance is indomitable-

It is indomitable, so who could know

The limits of its capacity?

And if its limits cannot be known,

Couldn't it nurture an entire nation?

Couldn't it become the natural Mother

Of its own enduring consciousness?

From a firm inner foundation,

The natural structure flourishes.

When the Cosmic insight guides,

Life is endlessly allowed to endure,

Through the fullness of Form

And its vibrant potential.

Here is Lao Tzu's guide to those involved in what are today called "the helping professions." If you are a therapist, a counselor, a doctor, a financial advisor, or involved in any work that offers help to others in the form of information and supportive services for the furtherance of physical, psychological, or material well-being, then you may have something to learn from this poem.

Lao Tzu's first point is crucial: helping others is not about sacrificing yourself. To "give of yourself" in the sense of sacrifice is the self-indulgent vanity of the hero, and Lao Tzu would like us to have none of this nonsense, for that is of no help to anyone.

Helping in the Cosmic Way is more about "reflecting nurturance"—that is, allowing oneself to be a "camera obscura of help," through which the true source of help reflects itself and is made effective. This true source of help comes from nature and the universe in their simple and often unseen energy-flows.

In the I Ching, such supportive currents of nature were known as "helpers." Curiously, and as quaint as it may sound to the modern ear, the term "helpers" has cognate variants in contemporary English, even within the icily objective field of scientific medicine. "Helper T Cells" are essential cellular elements of the body's immune system: when they are not present in the bloodstream, or are killed by a viral attack such as that which causes HIV/AIDS, the results can be disastrous for the organism. In the treatment of cancer, there is a type of therapy known as "adjuvant therapy." The word "adjuvant" is Latin for "helping." Other examples could be given, but the point is that the idea of helping presences, even from within ourselves, is not a strange or esoteric notion. Lao Tzu would like us to keep this in mind wherever we propose to help others, for when we can successfully include these helpers of the Cosmic Consciousness in our daily lives and our professional endeavors, we clear the way for the "continual nourishment of the harvest," which can only come (for humans) in the presence of Te, or Modesty. Modesty, in turn, is present wherever we deny ego, with its intrusive and clumsy interference, any influence in the helping process,. Modesty enables transformation: it can arouse the helpers and thus be "indomitable" because it is pure consciousness, which has the quantum ability to reach past time and space, into the subatomic realm where true healing occurs.

With Tao, You Are Supreme

In
ruling men be reserved.

To be reserved is to conform to Tao.

To conform to Tao is to achieve Teh.

With Teh anything is possible.

Because
anything is possible,

no one knows your supremacy.

Because no one knows your supremacy,

a nation can be ruled well.

Because
this is a Mother Principle

it long endures.

Therefore you are as deeply rooted

and as immortal as it is.

For the regulation of mankind and the service of heaven nothing equals reserve power. Reserve power means a speedy submission. Speedy submission implies a rich store of energy. A rich store of energy means the subjugation of everything. Everything being subdued none knows his limits. His limits being

unknown his sovereign power is assured, having the root of sovereignty which endures for long.

This may be described as a "deep taproot," and a "durable peduncle," – the perpetual vitality and continued manifestation of the Tao.

In ruling men and in serving heaven, the Sage uses only moderation.

By moderation alone he is able to have conformed early (to Tao).

This early conformity is called intensive accumulation of virtue.

With this intensive accumulation of virtue, there is nothing that he cannot overcome.

Because there is nothing that he cannot overcome, no one will be able to know his supremacy.

Because no one knows his supremacy he can take possession of a country.

Because what he does is identified with the Mother in taking possession of a country, he can long endure.

This means that he is deep rooted and firmly based, and knows the way of longevity and immortality.

A Sensible Guide

In governing people and serving nature, nothing is better than conserving.

In general, only conserving

deserves to be called early readiness.

Early readiness: call it emphasizing accumulating virtuosity.

If one emphasizes accumulating virtuosity then there is nothing one cannot conquer.

If there is nothing one cannot conquer, no one knows one's limit.

Those of whom no one knows their limits

may take states.

The mother of taking states

is able to endure.

This is called the deep root and inherent base

Of the guide to long-life and enduring vision.

In guiding people and working according to nature,

It is best to follow renunciation.

Following renunciation means returning soon.

Returning soon means accumulating attainment.

Accumulating attainment, everything can be dealt with.

Dealing with everything leads to limitlessness.

With limitlessness, one can govern the country.

Governing the country through its origin leads to endurance.

This means that to root deeply and to plant firmly leads to longevity and eternal consciousness.

Therefore, governing a large nation is as simple as preparing a dish of food.

The best way to rule the people and serve Heaven is to be frugal.

To be frugal means to return to the beginning of creation.

To know the beginning of creation means to accumulate virtue.

Accumulating virtue means to overcome everything.

To overcome everything means to reach the limit.

By reaching the limit, one can possess a kingdom.

When one has possessed the mother of the kingdom,

the kingdom will then live long.

This is called the deep-rooted foundation.

This is the way to long life.

In governing the people and serving heaven,

There is nothing like sparingness.

Sparingness alone

Can lead you to early submission.

Early submission means accumulating virtue repeatedly.

If you accumulate virtue repeatedly,

There is nothing you cannot overcome.

If there is nothing you cannot overcome,

Nobody knows its limit.

If nobody knows its limit,

You are fit to possess a state.

If you possess the mother of governing a state,

You may long endure.

This is called the way

To deepen the roots and strengthen the base,

To lengthen life and perpetuate vision.

When the government is indifferent and inactive,

The people will be happy and wealthy,

When the government discriminates and divides,

The people will be restless and dissatisfied.

Happiness is borne on the back of sorrow,

Sorrow dwells beneath happiness.

Therefore, who can know the virtues of good government?

Only when the government does not rectify anything.

Otherwise, the rectification becomes a strategy,

And good becomes evil.

People have been aware of this for a long time.

Therefore the sage is square and does not cut others,

He has a point, but he does not pierce others,

He is straight, but he does not straighten others,

He shines, but he does not dazzle others.

In ruling the people and in serving heaven it is best for a ruler to be sparing.

It is because he is sparing

That he may be said to follow the way from the start;

Following the way from the start he may be said to accumulate an abundance of
virtue;

Accumulating an abundance of virtue there is nothing he cannot overcome;

When there is nothing he cannot overcome, no one knows his limit;

When no one knows his limit

He can possess a state;

When he possesses the mother of a state

He can then endure.

This is called the way of deep roots and firm stems by which one lives to see
many days.

Hold Fast to Reason

To govern the people is the affair of heaven and there is nothing like thrift.

Now consider that thrift is said to come from early practice.

By early practice it is said that we can accumulate an abundance of virtue. If one accumulates an abundance of virtue then there is nothing that can not be overcome.

When nothing can not be overcome then no one knows his limit. When no one knows his limit one can have possession of the commonwealth.

Who has possession of the commonwealth's mother [thrift] may last and abide.

This is called the possession of deep roots and of a staunch stem. To life, to everlastingness, to comprehension, this is the way.

A father who is moderate is able to be a genuine support. Because he doesn't consider himself, his acts are full of virtue. Having no vision of the future, he is totally present. Without fixed ideas, he can fit perfectly to any situation.

The master has no self, therefore knows no limits. Even death cannot stop him.

In governing people and in taking care of the cosmos, the best is restraint.

With restraint, one is ever ready.

Ever ready, one focuses on virtue.

Focusing on virtue, one overcomes everything.

Overcoming everything, one's limit does not come into being.

With one's limit not coming into being, one gains the state.

Having the foundation to governance, one lasts long.

This is deep root and solid foundation.

This is Direction - long lasting and long living.

To govern people and serve heaven

there's nothing like thrift.

Thrift means submitting early,

and submitting early means storing up Integrity.

Store up Integrity and nothing is beyond you.

Once nothing is beyond you,

no one knows where it will all end.

Once no one knows where it will end,

you can nurture a nation.

And nurturing the nation's mother too

you can last and last.

This is called rooted deep and solid,

the Way of long life and enduring insight.

Governing the people or interacting with Nature,

Nothing is more important than being frugal.

Only being frugal can one be prepared for the future.

Early preparation emphasizes heavy conservation of resources.

Emphasizing conservation assures no obstacles in the future.

No future obstacle, then the prospect knows no limit.

Knowing of no limit, a state is well prepared.

Govern the state with this principle,

It will long endure.

In
governing people

Noone compares efforts of the heavens to restraint.

In
the end only restraint is appropriately called quickly resolving

What is called quickly resolving has heavy accumulation of ideal.

Following
heavy accumulation of ideal

Comes absence of lacking conquering

Following absence of lacking conquering

Noone knows limits

When noone knows limits

Presence of a nation can happen.

In
the presence of the mother of a nation

Growth and longevity may happen.

Appropriately
called

Deep roots, firm stalks, growth, life, longevity, looking
at tao.

The essential for co-operation with heaven in the government of men, is to moderate one's action.

This moderation should be the prime care. It procures perfect efficacy, which succeeds in everything, even the governing of the empire.

He who possesses this mother of the empire (wise moderation), will last a long time.

It is called the pivoting root, the solid trunk. It is the principle of perpetuity.

In governing people and serving Heaven

There is nothing like conservation

Only with conservation is it called submitting early

Submitting early is called emphasis on accumulating virtues

Accumulating virtues means there is nothing one cannot overcome

When there is nothing that one cannot overcome

One's limits are unknown

The limitations being unknown, one can possess sovereignty

With this mother principle of power, one can be everlasting

This is called deep roots and firm foundation

The Tao of longevity and lasting vision

When it comes to serving the natural laws of Heaven, managing others as well as yourself, there is nothing like the principle of conservation - the principle of valuing and using efficiently your time, energy, mind and spirit.

The best way to conserve your inner resources is to surrender to the flow of the Tao. It is in your best interest to give up rebelling and moving against the flow as soon as possible. The sooner you stop wasting time and energy in useless debates and intellectualizations, the sooner you can start accumulating virtues - positive things and life-affirming values - in your life.

When you accumulate virtues by directing your time, energy, mind and spirit toward worthwhile cultivation, there are no obstacles you cannot overcome. The focus that is possible when you consciously conserve and direct your inner resources makes you powerful spiritually. It allows you to become, quite literally, an unlimited individual.

Once you move beyond the limits that hamper most people, you gain power over yourself, as well as a natural authority that people respond to. You are able to influence them effortlessly because their respect for you flows naturally. This is the mother principle of true authority. Unlike the transient power achieved through force or domination, it is a positive force that lasts.

With this lasting power, you'll have a firm foundation upon which to build harmonious relationships with others. This positive force takes root deeply in the hearts of people and also in yourself. It is the Tao of longevity - a vision of everlasting harmony and leadership.

TO KEEP TAO

In governing the people and in worshipping heaven nothing surpasses moderation. To value moderation, one must form the habit early. Its early acquisition will result in storing and accumulating vitality. By storing and accumulating vitality nothing is impossible.

If nothing is impossible then one is ignorant of his limits. If one does not know his limitations, one may possess the state. He who possesses moderation is thereby lasting and enduring. It is like having deep roots and a strong stem. This is of long life and enduring insight the Tao (way).

In governing people and serving heaven,

Nothing is better than being sparing (se).

Being sparing,

Is called early adherence [to Tao].

Adhering early,

Is called being heavy with accumulated te (chung chi te).

To be heavy with accumulated te,

Then [such a person is] all overcoming.

Being all overcoming,

Then there is no knowing the limit (chi).

Not knowing the limit,

One may rule a state.

Having the mother of a state,

It may last long.

This is called being deeply rooted and firmly founded,

The way to long life and enduring vision (chiu shih).

With Tao You Are Supreme

In ruling men be reserved. To be reserved is to conform to Tao; to conform to Tao is to achieve Teh; with Teh anything is possible; because anything is possible, no one knows your supremacy; because no one knows your supremacy, a nation can be ruled well; because this is a Mother Principle it long endures; therefore you are as deeply rooted and as immortal as it is.

In governing the country and serving Heaven, show restraint.

Showing restraint is submission to the Tao.

Submission to the Tao will fill you with Te.

Being filled with Te, there will be no limit to your power,

and there will be nothing you cannot overcome.

When there is nothing you cannot overcome,

you will be a true ruler indeed.

You will be one with the country.

You will be the Mother of the country.

Being the Mother of the country,

you will have deep roots and a firm base.

Your reign will be long–lasting.

This is the Tao of long life and eternal vision.

Fifty-nine

In caring for others and serving heaven,

There is nothing like using restraint.

Restraint begins with giving up one's own ideas.

This depends on Virtue gathered in the past.

If there is a good store of Virtue, then nothing is impossible.

If nothing is impossible, then there are no limits.

If a man knows no limits, then he is fit to be a ruler.

The mother principle of ruling holds good for a long time.

This is called having deep roots and a firm foundation,

The Tao of long life and eternal vision.

The best way to govern the state and keep in good health

Is to stint vitality.

To stint vitality means to attempt an early preparation;

The early preparation means to keep accumulating virtue;

Keep accumulating virtue and one can become all-conquering;

Be all-conquering and one's power will be beyond measure;

When one's power is beyond measure,

He can be entrusted with the duty of defending the state.

When there is the principle of governing the state,

The government can long endure.

This is called the Tao of deep roots and sturdy stems

By which one can live and see longer time.

In ruling the people and serving Heaven

Nothing is better than being sparing.

Truly, being sparing

Means submitting early.

Submitting early

Means accumulating Te heavily.

If you accumulate Te heavily,

There will be nothing you cannot overcome.

If there is nothing you cannot overcome,

You will find no limit.

If you find no limit,

You will be fit to rule a state.

If you possess the mother of the state,

You will be long-lasting.

This is called deeply rooted and firmly planted.

It is the way of long life and lasting sight.

Nothing beats frugality in governing a country or following the way of Dao.

Frugality compels you to get ready in advance.

To get ready in advance means you start to amass virtues straightaway.

The accumulation of virtues will enable you to achieve practically anything in life.

Ability to accomplish anything means you have incredible power.

With this limitless power, you can govern a country.

Governing the country by following the way of Dao, you will endure.

A plant can bear great fruit only if it has deep roots.

Building deep roots is the way to perpetuate.

Adherence to Tao

Shou Tao

In ruling men and serving Heaven,

Nothing is comparable to a prudent economy.

A prudent economy means early preparation;

Early preparation means further accumulation of virtue;

Further accumulation of virtue can subdue everything;

The ability to subdue everything knows no bounds;

Knowing no bounds (in subduing opposition)

Can lead to the possession of a kingdom;

Possession of a kingdom along with its Mother

Can endure a long time.

This is called "deep roots and strong stalks."

It is the way to eternal life and everlasting vision.

In the ruling of men and the serving of Heaven nothing equals moderaiton.

For moderations leads to foresight in concerving;

Foresight in conserving leads to the storing of treasures of power.

The strength of one who has stored such treasures of power cannot be overcome.

As nothing can overcome it, its potency is boundless.

Because its potency is boundless,

Its possessors can attain sovereignty over the whole kingdom.

And if, having attained sovereignty, he returns to the Mother,

He will endure long.

For by striking deep roots he will be building on firm foundations,

And through contemplation he will repose in the Eternal Tao.

In ruling people and serving heaven,

It is best to be sparing.

To be sparing is to yield quickly.

To yield quickly is to double-store virtue.

If virtue is double-stored

Nothing can't be overcome.

When nothing can't be overcome,

No one can know his limits.

When no one knows his limits,

That one can take on the country.

When that one takes on

The mother of the country,

He can last and endure.

Call this having deep roots

And a strong stem:

Living, lasting,

And seeing into Tao.

In managing people and serving Heaven, there is nothing better than sparing unnecessary activities and expense.

To be thrifty means to return to the simple essence of life.

To return to the simple essence of life is to nourish subtle virtue.

To nourish subtle virtue is to be able to overcome any difficulty.

Being able to overcome difficulties,

one can break through all limitations.

One's limitlessness is derived from whole and boundless virtue.

The source of such virtue can support one to serve a nation.

Then one's benevolence can be enduring.

This is the way to firmly plant and deeply root oneself in the subtle path of universal integration.

This is the achievement of the Way of immortality.

LIX.

Holding
Past to the Tao

In
governing men or dealing with Heaven there is nothing like moderation,

And
moderation is what is called an early habituation,

Which,
when acquired, heaps virtues up in vast accumulation.

And
then, with virtues thus heaped up in vast accumulation,

To
the overcoming of everything there
is
no limitation,

And
when one knows no limits, he may even have the nation.

Possessing
the Mother of the State, he is thereby long-enduring,

As we
say of a tree, its roots are deep, and its staunch stem reassuring,

In
clearest sight to keep the Tao is lasting life securing.

To govern men and to serve heaven nothing is better than to have a reserve.

The Master indeed has a reserve; it is called brilliant foresight.

Brilliant foresight is called the increasing abundance of Teh.

If you have an ever-increasing abundance of Teh , then your Inner Life is unconquerable.

If you Inner Life in unconquerable, then its limits cannot be known.

If you cannot gauge the limits of your Inner Life, then you shall surely possess the kingdom.

If you possess the Mother of the kingdom,

You shall endure forever.

This is to be deep rooted and to have a firm foundation.

The possessor of Tao shall have enduring life and infinite vision.

In governing a people

and in serving Heaven,

There is nothing like

not being wasteful.

To not be wasteful

is to return before

going away from the path.

To return

before going away

from the path

is to have

a double supply of Virtue (Power).

To have

a double supply of Virtue (Power)

is to overcome everything.

To overcome everything

is to have no limits.

Only they who have no limits can have a kingdom.

Only they who have the true understanding of the Tao can last long.

This is the way

to be deep-rooted and

firm-planted

in the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ).

This is the secret of

long life and

lasting understanding.

For governing men and serving heaven nothing is equal to moderation.

Just because there is moderation, this means applying oneself early (to the Way).

To apply oneself early is to garner a double (harvest of) Virtue, there is not a thing of which one is not capable, nobody knows the extreme limit (of that capacity). If nobody knows the extreme limit, one may possess a kingdom. The "mother" of possessing a kingdom may endure long.

This means that a deep root and a firm foundation are the way to long life and durability.

For regulating the human (in our constitution) and rendering

the (proper) service to the heavenly, there is nothing like

moderation.

It
is only by this moderation that there is effected an early

return (to man's normal state). That early return is what I call the

repeated accumulation of the attributes (of the Tao). With that

repeated accumulation of those attributes, there comes the subjugation

(of every obstacle to such return). Of this subjugation we know not

what shall be the limit; and when one knows not what the limit shall

be, he may be the ruler of a state.

He
who possesses the mother of the state may continue long. His

case is like that (of the plant) of which we say that its roots are

deep and its flower stalks firm:--this is the way to secure that its

enduring life shall long be seen.

To organize mankind and serve heaven,
there is nothing like 'thrift!'

Now,
only through thriftiness
can one be prepared;
being prepared
means
having a large store of DEI.
With a large store of DEI
one can overcome
anything.
Being able to overcome anything,
no one knows your limits!

If no one knows what you are capable of,
you may have your Kingdom.

Being the Mother of a Kingdom,
one can long endure.
This
is called "planting your roots firm and deep,
the Path of long life and lasting
vision."

To
serve and care for others

With restraint and moderation

Stay centered in the here and now

And free of limitation

If
you keep returning

To this your central root

You will possess forever

Awareness undilute

IN governing a people and in serving Heaven,

There is nothing like frugality.

To be frugal is to return before straying.

To return before straying is to have a double reserve of virtue.

To have a double reserve of virtue is to overcome everything.

To overcome everything is to reach an invisible height.

Only he who has reached an invisible height can have a kingdom.

Only he who has got the Mother of a kingdom can last long.

This is the way to be deep-rooted and firm-planted in the Tao,

The secret of long life and lasting vision.

In governing the people and serving Heaven: there is nothing better than frugality.

To be frugal one must be prepared beforehand.

The accumulation of great virtue is the thing that will give you the strength to properly govern and serve.

With virtuous strength nothing is impossible.

This is spoken of this having deep roots and a firm stalk rooted in a solid foundation,

the way of long life and great insight.

There is nothing better than moderation

for teaching people or serving Heaven.

Those who use moderation

are already on the path to the Tao.

Those
who follow the Tao early

will have an abundance of virtue.

When there is an abundance of virtue,

there is nothing that can not be done.

Where there is limitless ability,

then the kingdom is within your grasp.

When you know the Mother of the kingdom,

then you will be long enduring.

This
is spoken of as the deep root and the firm trunk,

the Way to a long life and great spiritual vision.

Whether you are leading a group or going about your daily life, you need to be conscious. You need to be aware of what is happening and how things happen. If you are aware of what is happening and how things happen, you can act accordingly. You can stay clear of trouble, and be both vital and effective.

Remember that you too are a natural process. Being aware of how things happen includes being aware of yourself. Your life unfolds according to the same principle that governs every other unfolding. You are rooted in the common ground of all creation.

Being like everything else means that you are ordinary. But consciously knowing that you are like everything else is extraordinary. And knowing how that universality works and having the sense to act accordingly is the source of your power, your endurance, and your excellence.

Consciousness or awareness, then, is the source of your ability. Learn to become increasingly conscious.

In leading people and serving Heaven

There is nothing better than moderation.

In moderation, one is already following the Tao.

When one follows the Tao, great goodness is abundant.

When great goodness is in abundance,

There is nothing that cannot be overcome.

When there is nothing that cannot be overcome

Then there are no limits.

Having no limits, one can certainly govern a country.

If you know the country's Mother, you will long endure.

I call this having deep roots and a firm stalk.

This is the Way of long life and great insight.

In
leading people and manifesting Infinity,

there is nothing as essential as

indifference.

Refusing
to distinguish the self is the crucial

requirement

of indifference.

Indifference is the product of maintaining one's

focus

on the oneness of all things.

If you are at one with Infinity and the potential

of all things,

then you have no limitations.

If
one has no limitations,

she is qualified to rule the world.

If
she is at one with the world,

and consequently indifferent,

she will endure.

This
is the manifestation of deep roots and a firm

foundation,

a oneness with Infinity,

immortality and perfect vision.

In governing men and serving Heaven, there is nothing like Economy.

Now, Economy means early preparation.

Early preparation means to value the accumulation of Virtue.

Value the accumulation of Virtue, and anything is possible.

When anything is possible, there are no limits.

When there are no limits, the Nation can be gained.

Gain the Mother of the Nation, and survival is assured.

This means deep roots, a solid foundation,

and a lifetime of following the Way.

When ruling the people and serving Heaven,

There is nothing better than restraint.

In being restrained, one may follow Tao from the beginning.

Following Tao from the beginning is to accumulate great Virtue.

Accumulating great Virtue there is nothing which cannot be overcome.

When there is nothing that cannot be overcome, there are no limits.

Knowing no limits, one can rule the state.

Possessing the Mother1 of the state,one will long endure.

This is called having deep roots and a firm stalk,

And is the way to long life and lasting vision.

1. 'Mother' here may mean 'Tao'. (See Chan 1969, 164, n. 97)

To govern the world to cultivate one's nature,

One should stick to frugality.

For being frugal,

One will not stray from the Way as others do.

Staying with the Way, one can accumulate earlier.

Since one has stayed and accumulated longer in the Way,

One can overcome more wanton desires.

When one has overcome all desires,

Others would by no means be able to know

The limits of one's abilities.

One can then be qualified to lead a nation.

With a qualified leader, a nation can be long.

The Way is therefore the longest-rooted system

That supports the longest life span.

"When it comes to governing the people and serving Heaven there's no one like a farmer."

Just being a farmer - this means getting dressed early. Getting dressed early means increasing one's store of Te increasing one's store of Te, then nothing is impossible nothing impossible, then no telling the limit no telling the limit, then one can possess the state.

One who possesses the Mother of the state can last a long time.

This means having deep roots and strong foundations, the Way of 'lasting life, good eyesight into old age'.

In order to serve Tao successfully by helping other people, one has to be able to preserve and accumulate the power of consciousness. This requires renouncing everything that wastes this power.

Such a renunciation on the higher stages of the Path helps one to grow one's own Power of Te,* which can become inexhaustible and can help one to cognize Tao in fullness.

And Tao is the Eternal and Infinite Primordial Foundation of every man and of the entire material world. The way which unites one with that Foundation is called root.

* Power of Te, in other terms, is the Brahmanic component of an individual consciousness developed through the methods of buddhi yoga.

To lead a country, modesty is necessary.

The Wise Person being reasonable, he is on the Tao Way.

Being on the Tao Way, he is accompanied by Virtue

In everything he does.

Thus he is successful in all undertakings.

He can even lead a country by his example.

He is qualified to lead because,

He follows the Way of the Heaven.

There
is nothing as good as frugality for regulating the people and for serving Heaven.
Now only frugality can be called an early compliance. An early compliance is
spoken of as a double accumulation of virtue. When virtue is doubly accumulated,
then there is nothing that is not overcome. When there is nothing that is not
overcome, then no one knows your limit. When no one knows your limit, then you
may possess the kingdom. When you have the mother of the kingdom, you can be
long enduring. That is spoken of as the deep root, the firm-set trunk, the Way
to long life and enduring vision.

In governing the people and serving heaven,

There is nothing like thriftiness.

Only through thriftiness can one submit [to Tao] early;

Having submitted early, one accumulates virtue.

Having accumulated virtue, one can overcome everything.

Having overcome everything, one can know no limits.

Knowing no limits, one is able to rule a nation.

Possessing the mother of the nation, he may last long.

This is called the deep root and firm stalks,

And the way to longevity and everlasting vision.

The Way of Moderation

In leading people and serving Nature,

There is nothing better than moderation.

Since, indeed, moderation means yielding early;

Yielding early means accumulating Power.

When Power is accumulated,

Nothing is impossible.

When nothing is impossible,

One knows no limits.

One who knows no limits

Can possess the organization.

An organization that possesses the Mother

Can endure and advance.

This means deep roots and firm foundation:

Durability and longevity through observation of the Tao.

If a tree stands firm to the wind, it will not be around long. Be free from your thoughts. Travel without destination. Make do with what you have, and then let go.

"For ruling men or serving God,

There's nothing else like stores saved up."

By
"stores saved up" is meant forehandedness,

Accumulate Virtue, such that nothing

Can resist it and its limit

None can guess: such infinite resource

Allows the jurisdiction of the king;

Whose kingdom then will long endure

If it provides the Mother an abode.

Indeed it is the deeply rooted base,

The firm foundation of the Way

To immortality of self and name.

For the rule of the people and the service of Heaven, there is nothing better than the principle of "parsimony."

Only by "parsimony" can one be unhurried and get ready early.

Being unhurried and getting ready early is what I call the repeated accumulation of the "De" of "parsimony."

With the repeated accumulation of De, one can victoriously overcome any obstacles.

The power which can overcome any obstacles is immeasurable.

With immeasurable power one can govern a state.

Having the foundation of government, one can maintain sovereignty very long.

This is called the Way in which one can plant the roots deep and make the stalks firm and maintain a long life.

For ordering the people and serving Heaven, nothing is better than husbandry.

Only husbandry can be called the quick way to submission.

By "quick way to submission" we mean the repetitive accumulation of virtue.

If one repetitively accumulates virtue, there is nothing that he cannot conquer.

As there is nothing that he cannot conquer, no one knows the limits he can reach.

As no one knows his limits, he can, accordingly, keep his state.

If one maintains the mother of the state, he can, accordingly, long endure.

This we refer to as having deep roots firmly established, for it is the Dao of long life and enduring oversight.

1. For ordering humanity and serving Heaven, nothing's so good as being sparing.

2. For only if you are sparing can you, therefore, early submit [to the Way].

3. Early submission—this is called to repeatedly accumulate Virtue.

4. If you repeatedly accumulate Virtue, then there is nothing you can't overcome.

5. When there is nothing you can't overcome, no one knows where it will end.

6. When no one knows where it will end, you can possess the state.

7. And when you possess the mother of the state, you can last a very long time.

8. This is called [having] deep roots and a firm base,

9. It's the Way of long life and long-lasting vision.

Leadership is
based on moderation.

Practice moderation,

and you'll get in touch

with the power of Tao.

If you get right
with Tao,

nothing is impossible.

If you get right with Tao,

there's no limit to what you can do.

If you get right with Tao,

you can be a true leader.

Remember this
advice

if you want to be a leader:

Plant deep roots in firm soil.

Get right with Tao,

and you'll always see things clearly.

.

Be Frugal

In leading people and serving heaven

it is best to be frugal.

Being frugal is to be prepared from the start.

Being prepared from the start is to build up power.

By building up power nothing is impossible.

If nothing is impossible, then there are no limits.

Those without limits are capable of leading a country.

Those with maternal leadership can long endure.

This is to be deeply rooted in a firm foundation,

the way of long life and eternal vision.

To advance the people and serve Tao nothing is better than serenity.

Serenity is caring foresight that guards against troubles.

It leads to abundance through being filled with Tao which is being superior to every situation.

To be superior means to be without limits to be without limits means to be owner of the empire To be owner of the empire means to be rooted in the limitless to be rooted in the limitless means to have duration.

Thus a firm foundation in the unfathomable immortality and the All-wisdom of the Tao grow out of serenity.

A Way To The Longevity

Lao Tze says,

If a king of men knows to regulate human affairs by using the way of Heaven, he should know there is nothing better than to be sparing.

It is only by being sparing that an early obedience to the Tao is effected.

That early obedience is what I call the repeated accumulation of the attributes.

With the repeated accumulation of those attributes, there comes the conquest of every obstacle in the way.

Of this conquest he knows not what shall be the limit, and when he knows not what the limit shall be, he is qualified to be the ruler of a state.

He who possesses this motherly method of governing may continue to hold his rulership.

This method may be compared to a giant tree with its roots deep and its flower stalks firm;

and it is also a way which leads to enjoy long life and eternal gazing.

GUARDING THE TAO

By
acting with no thought of self-advancement,

but with self-restraint,

it is possible to lead,

and genuinely care for others.

This happens by acting virtuously,

and leaving nothing to be done.

A
foundation virtuous and firm,

rooted in receptivity,

is a prerequisite of good leadership,

and for a life both long and strong.

He whose virtue knows no limit,

is most fitting to lead.

His roots are deep,

and his life protected

by his meditative practice,

as the bark protects the tree.

For governing a country well

there is nothing better than moderation.

The mark of a moderate man

is freedom from his own ideas.

Tolerant like the sky,

all-pervading like sunlight,

firm like a mountain,

supple like a tree in the wind,

he has no destination in view

and makes use of anything

life happens to bring his way.

Nothing is impossible for him.

Because he has let go,

he can care for the people's welfare

as a mother cares for her child.

To rule the people and serve the world there is nothing better than to follow the model of nature.

To follow the model of nature is to be the early appreciation of Dao.

To be the early appreciation of Dao is to give emphasis to the accumulation of Virtues.

To give emphasis to the accumulation of Virtues there is nothing that cannot be overcome.

When one has nothing that cannot be overcome, then nobody knows his limit.

When nobody knows his limit, then he may have a kingdom to rule.

When one has a kingdom to rule, he may mother (rule) the world.

He may rule everywhere and forever.

This is called the way of deepening the root;

consolidating the sprout;

prolonging the life;

and enduring the rule.

For governing people and serving the heaven, nothing is better than frugality.

Only frugality enables the pre-empty measures.

Pre-empty measures mean a great accumulation of Action.

A great accumulation of Action leaves nothing to be conquered.

When nothing needs to be conquered,

No-boundary is known.

When no-boundary is known, it allows the country to exist.

The country, existing from its source, can endure.

This is the Tao of having a deep root, a strong stem, a long life, and an enduring vision.

LIX

If
you would lead men and follow the way

It's good to be sparing in your actions

For only by being sparing can you submit early to the way

And this is how to accumulate virtue

When
you accumulate virtue in this way

There is no obstacle you can't overcome

Without obstacles, no one can predict your downfall

Thus you can possess the state

Being
one with the way of the state like this

Creates deep roots and a firm base

And leads to long life and lasting work

To Govern the Human and Serve the Divine

To govern the human and serve the divine,

nothing compares to frugality.

Only frugality brings early recovery;

early recovery means buildup of power.

Build up virtue,

and you master all.

When you master all,

no one knows your limit.

When no one knows your limit,

you can maintain a nation.

When you maintain the matrix of a nation,

you can last long.

This is called making the root deep and the basis firm,

the Way of long life and eternal vision.

Frugality is the best for governing people or serving heaven.

With frugality, we can be prepared in advance.

Advanced preparation is to emphasize accumulating Te.

Accumulating Te, we can accomplish any endeavor.

Accomplishing any endeavor means there is not limit.

With no limit we can have a kingdom.

With frugality as the mother of the kingdom, the kingdom can last long.

This is called deep root and firm foundation.

With such root and foundation we can enjoy longevity.

In governing a people and in serving Heaven, there is nothing like frugality.

To be frugal is to return early.

To return early is to accumulate an abundance of Virtue.

Accumulating an abundance of Virtue, everything can be overcome.

Overcoming everything, the unknown height is reached.

He who has reached an unknown height can reign a state.

He who reigns a state from its root can last long.

This is the Way of the deep root and the firm foot, of the of long life and not-getting-old.

In caring for others and serving heaven,

no one like farmers.

Farming depends on reliability.

Reliability depends on Virtue gathered in the past (such as seeds).

With a good store of Virtue, nothing is impossible.

Nothing is impossible,

there are no limits.

Without limitation, he can be a ruler of a country (or a harem).

Having a country, he can endure.

This is called having deep roots and a firm foundation.

This is the Tao of long life and eternal vision.

For governing others and serving heaven

there is nothing better than moderation.

A person who is moderate returns to the path.

Returning to the path brings an abundance of Virtue.

This good store of Virtue cannot be conquered.

Virtue that cannot be conquered knows no limit.

Only a person who has lirnitiess Virtue is fit to lead.

Only the leader who possesses the Mother of the country

will long endure.

This is called making the roots go deep

by restraining the trunk.

Learn to focus your life and you will see many days.

No
person has power to lead others or to serve the world

unless one has a store of energy.

Storing energy is done through breathing

breathing is done through meditation

Meditate

breathe

and your power cannot be overcome.

If your power cannot be overcome

it is boundless

Only what is boundless

is large enough to understand the full dimensions of reality.

Only what is rooted deep within the earth

can keep the understanding of the full dimensions of reality.

Being rooted deep in the earth takes letting go,

living long necessitates long meditation.

In managing human affairs, there's no better rule than to be sparing, which
is to forestall. You can't rule men nor serve heaven unless you have laid up
a store; Be [simply artistic] frugal, there's nothing better for serving heaven
and ruling people.

To forestall is to be prepared and strengthened; and by being frugal in such
ways one may recover quickly. To recover quickly means to accumulate [intense
moral] rather much. This "laying up a store" means quickly absorbing, And "quickly
absorbing" in the end means doubling one's garnered "power". Double your garnered
power and it acquires a strength that nothing can overcome. By the heavy accumulation
of virtue one can overcome everything. Be prepared and strengthened to be always
victorious: to have infinite capacity;

If there's nothing it can't overcome, it knows no bounds, then he will acquire
a capacity with limits well beyond anyone's knowledge. One can next overcome
nearly everything. And only what knows no bounds is huge enough to keep a whole
kingdom in its grasp. If his capacity is beyond anyone's knowledge, he is fit
to rule a kingdom. Who has infinite capacity is fit to rule, but only he who
having the kingdom goes to the mother, can keep it long. He who possesses he
mother (dao) of the state will last long. The mother (principle) of a ruling
country can long endure.

This is called the art of making the roots strike deep by fencing the trunk,
It signifies to be firmly rooted, to have deep strength, for the roots are deep
and the stalks are firm, road to immortality and enduring vision, the way of
long life and everlasting existence is won by making life long by fixed staring.

To rule men and serve heaven, there is nothing like thrift.

Now,

Only through thrift can one be prepared;

Being prepared means having a heavy store of integrity;

With a heavy store of integrity, he can overcome everything.

Able to overcome everything, no one knows his limits;

If no one knows his limits, he can have the kingdom;

Having the mother of the kingdom, he can long endure.

This is called "sinking roots firm and deep, the Way of long life and lasting vision."

In ruling men and in serving Heaven there is nothing like moderation.

By means of it one attains to his first estate.

When this is attained a man is possessed of an indefinite store of virtue.

With such a store of virtue he will overcome everything.

And of this mastery there will be no limit.

Thus, without hindrance, he may possess the Kingdom.

Such a man has the mother-constitution, and will endure indefinitely.

He is like the plant whose roots are deep and whose stem is firm.

Thus may a man live long and see many days.

Love Is the Basic Energy of Life

Love is the basic energy of life.

Nothing can stop your love from growing

because everything is fuel for its fire.

Like a tree that bends easily in the wind,

it accommodates to the natural events of life

and does not become overwhelmed.

It uses the times we call good

to fashion dances of joy.

It uses the times we call bad

to create the depths of our compassion.

Nothing is wasted.

Nothing is lost.

When you promise each other

to be there ''in sickness and in health"

you cooperate with the energy of love

which uses all circumstances

for its own good purposes.

Don't be discouraged by trials you now face.

Burn them in the furnace of your heart

and turn them into life's own energy.

To rule people and to serve Heaven there is nothing better than to be frugal.

Only by being frugal can one recover quickly. To recover quickly means
to accumulate virtue heavily. By the heavy accumulation of virtue one
can overcome everything. If one can overcome everything, then he will
acquire a capacity the limit of which is beyond anyone's knowledge. When
his capacity is beyond anyone's knowledge, he is fit to rule a state.

He who possesses the Mother (Tao) of the state will last long.

This means that the roots are deep and the stalks are firm, which is the way of long life and everlasting vision.

To lead men
and serve heaven, weigh the worth

Of the one source:

Use the single force

Which doubles the strength of the strong

By enabling man to go right, disabling him to go wrong,

Be so charged with the nature of life that you give your people birth,

That you mother your land, are the fit

And ever-iving root of it:

The seeing.root, whose eye is infinite.

The best thing in life is to be thrifty.

Only when you are thrifty, can you be prepared ahead of time.

Preparing ahead of time allows you to accumulate more DE.

Accumulating more DE allows you to overcome everything.

Overcoming everything allows you to have unmeasurable limits.

Having unmeasurable limits allows you to control a country.

When a country has the DAO, it can last long.

This is how you deepen and secure your roots, live long and last forever.

In governing people and serving heaven,

There is nothing better than thrift.

Thrift means expeditiously regaining balance after expending resources.

Expeditiously regaining balance means continually accumulating virtue.

Continually accumulating virtue means increasingly becoming invincible.

Increasingly becoming invincible means knowing that everything is possible.

One who knows that everything is possible is fit to govern people.

The mother principle of governing people holds good for a long time.

This is called deepening the root and firming the foundation,

Which is the way of long life and lasting vision.

To govern the world to cultivate one's nature,

One should stick to frugality.

For being frugal,

One will not stray from the Way as others do.

Staying with the Way, one can accumulate earlier.

Since one has stayed and accumulated longer in the Way,

One can overcome more wanton desires.

When one has overcome all desires,

Others would by no means be able to know

The limits of one's abilities.

One can then be qualified to lead a nation.

With a qualified leader, a nation can be long.

The Way is therefore the longest-rooted system

That supports the longest life span.

In governing the people and serving Heaven: there is nothing better than frugality.

To be frugal one must be prepared beforehand.

The accumulation of great virtue is the thing that will give you the strength to properly govern and serve.

With virtuous strength nothing is impossible.

This is spoken of this having deep roots and a firm stalk rooted in a solid foundation,

the way of long life and great insight.

