===== Chapter 4 =====

The Tao washes away and drinks them, possibly never getting full.

An abyss... it seems to be the ancestor of the ten-thousand things

Blunting their sharpness

Loosening their tangles

Harmonizing their lights

Equating their dust

Deep... it seems as though possibly alive.

The child of I-don't-know-who.

It shaped the foremost among the gods.

Tao is empty- its use never exhausted.

Bottomless - the origin of all things.

It blunts sharp edges, Unties knots, Softens glare, Becomes one with the dusty world.

Deeply subsistent -

I don't know whose child it is. It is older than the Ancestor.

Tao is empty yet when used, it is never used up.

The unbounded source of the myriad things!

It blunts the sharp edges.

Untangles the knots.

Dims the bright light.

Unites wordly dust.

Perfectly hidden, yet ever present.

I do not know its origin.

It seems to have existed before the creator himself.

TAO IS EMPTY

Tho' Tao is empty - its grace is inexhaustible

A deep and unfathomable source,

The ancestor of all there is.

Through the Tao: - Rough edges are smoothed.

- Hard knots are untied.

- Glare of light is softened.

- Busyness of life is tempered.

Tho' hidden deeply - it is ever present.

Its origin ? - A mystery to me.

It just seems to have been forever.

The Tao creates union that is never draining.

The Deep! It is like the ten-thousand things (everything) of the Source.

It blunts sharpness.

It unravels knots.

It harmonizes the light and it becomes one with the dust of the Earth.

Deep! It is enduring.

I do not know who its ruler is.

It came before the creation of images.

THE SPRING WITHOUT SOURCE

The Tao resembleth the emptiness of Space; to employ it, we must avoid

creating ganglia. Oh Tao, how vast art Thou, the Abyss of Abysses, thou

Holy and Secret Father of all Fatherhoods of Things!

Let
us make our sharpness blunt; let us loosen our complexes; let us

tone down our brightness to the general obscurity. Oh Tao, how still art

thou, how pure, continuous One beyond Heaven!

This
Tao hath no Father; it is beyond all other conceptions, higher than

the highest.

The Spirit is free of things yet inexhaustible in its impact. The Spiritis like the creator of all being. He dulls the sharp meanness that clarifiesall confusion. He unifies in kindness. He knows the oneness of man withall dust. The Spirit is eternal. I know not when it began. It almost seemedto have preceded the Lord Itself.

That which maintains the Creation

Is like an empty barrel that's inexhaustible

It is like a fathomless emptiness, filling the whole Creation

Its sharpness brings about curves

Its angles dissolve

It dims its light

It restrains its touch

How pure and calm it stays, like deep waters

I don't know its origin

It seems like it is even older than that by which it is brought forth

Nature contains nothing but natures; and these natures are nothing over and above Nature.

In Nature, all natures originate,

all conflicts are settled, all differences are united, all disturbances are quieted.

Yet no matter how many natures come into being, they can never exhaust Nature.

To look for an external source of Nature is foolish, for Nature is the source of all else.

The Way is like an empty vessel

That yet may be drawn from

Without ever needing to be filled.

It is bottomless; the very progenitor of all things in the world.

In it all sharpness is blunted,

All tangles untied,

All glare tempered,

All dust soothed.

It is like a deep pool that never dries.

Was it too the child of something else?

We cannot tell.

But as a substanceless image it existed before the Ancestor.

Tao is hollow emptiness.

The substance of All,

it is absent of substance.

Dimensionless Void,

it is the source of the ten thousand things.

It blunts sharpness,

unravels entanglements,

diffuses brightness,

merges with dust.

Dark, invisible, it only seems to be.

It is the child of no-thing

and the father of God.

The way (is) fluid, and yet in its practice

Somehow there is nothing in excess

So deep-

As if ancestor to the myriad beings

Blunt in its sharpness

Resolved in its tangles

Shaded in its glare

One with this world

So deep & clear

Seeming as though seeming to exist

We do not know whose child this is

(But) imagine it divinity's ancestor

Properties of Tao

The Road is an empty vessel;

Yet when you use it, you never need to fill it again.

Deep and still, it seems to be

the source of the ten thousand things!

It blunts the sharpness, it unties the knot,

Soften the glare, and settles the dust.

Submerged, it seems perhaps to exist.

We do not know whose child it is.

It seems to be the forefather of the gods.

Tao is a whirling emptiness, yet when used it cannot be exhausted.

Out of this mysterious well flows everything in existence.

Blunting sharp edges, Untangling knots, Softening the glare, It evolves us all and makes the whole world one.

Something is there, hidden and deep!

But I do not know whose child it is - It came even before God.

Empty, like a well, is the Cosmic Whole:

Empty, and forever inexhaustible.

Endless as the limitless

Forms of creation, drawn through Time-

Before its birth, beyond its reach-

Softening the jagged edges,

Untangling complexity,

Dimming the garishness of excess

With the soil of its simplicity.

So dark, so empty-who could have made it?

It is the child of nothing,

The parent of us all.

Here is the first of many watery metaphorical expressions found throughout the Tao Te Ching. Lao Tzu likens the Tao to a well—dark, empty, yet containing the generational spark and the nourishment of all being. Water, even when it appears still to our eyes, is always in motion—wearing down the sharp and jagged, dissolving what is obdurate, softening glare—moving freely through its permutations between earth and sky, light and dark. Following the guideline that he established in Chapter 1, Lao Tzu describes the Cosmic Whole through what it does. But as for what it is, only stepping beyond the limits of reason can point the way: it is the emptiness that contains everything. It flows and it freezes; it evaporates and condenses; it merges into every element and state of being. It is the quantum darkness from which light freely flows—try to move it, and it is still; try to stop it, and it will always be moving.

Tao is a vast immeasurable void.

It can be used to infinity.

It is truly inexhaustible.

Like
nature, it appears to be the origin of everything.

In it, conflicts (sharp edges) are satisfied (rounded).

Differences (tangles) are resolved (untied).

Observations (light) are clarified (tempered).

Disturbances (turmoil) are quieted (submerged).

It
is like a deep dark pool.

I do not know its source.

It is like a prelude to nature,

a preface to God.

The Tao is as emptiness, so are its operations. It resembles non-fullness.

Fathomless! It seems to be the ancestor of all form.

It removes sharpness, unravels confusion, harmonizes brightness, and becomes one with everything.

Pellucid! It bears the appearance of permanence.

I know not whose son it is. Its Noumenon was before the Lord.

Tao, when put in use for its hollowness, is not likely to be filled.

In its profundity it seems to be the origin of all things.

In its depth it seems ever to remain.

I do not know whose offspring it is; But it looks like the predecessor of Nature.

Using Guidance

Guidance pours out but in using it, something is not filled.

Whew! It's like the ancestor of the ten-thousand natural kinds.

'Dull' its 'sharp', 'untie' its 'tie', 'blend' its 'bright', 'together' its
'diffused particles'.

Ooo! It's like it partly endures.

I don't know whose son it is.

It is before the emperor of signs!

Tao functions through its nothingness.

And can not be conceived of as full of things.

Profound indeed, it is the model of all things.

Dulling its sharpness,

Releasing its entanglements,

Tempering its light, and

Unifying with the earth,

Clearly, indeed, it remains.

I do not know who created it,

But it is likely that it existed prior to God.

The Tao is based on harmony between emptiness and abundance.

It is the deep source of the myriad creatures.

It softens their sharpness.

It releases their confusion.

It lessens their lustre.

It merges with their dust.

The Tao is so clear and so transparent that it is nearly invisible, nearly formless;

no one can know its origin,

for it came before all creation.

The Tao is the empty space of a vessel,

Yet, when used,

Never brims over.

How deep,

Like the ten thousand things' progenitor!

It files its sharpness,

Unravels its entanglements,

Softens its brightness,

And mingles with the dust.

How transparent,

As if existing!

I do not know whose son it was;

Seemed to precede the Emperor.

The Tao, if you examine it, will always be empty and will never be full.

In its infinite emptiness lies the source of all things,

It will remain in its depths forever.

I don't know whose seed it is,

But it looks like the predecessor of the universe itself.

The way is empty, yet use will not drain it.

Deep, it is like the ancestor of the myriad creatures.

Blunt
the sharpness;

Untangle the knots;

Soften the glare;

Let your wheels move only along old ruts.

Darkly
visible, it only seems as if it were there.

I know not whose son it is.

It images the forefather of God.

Sourceless

Reason is empty, but its use is inexhaustible. In its profundity, verily, it resembleth the arch-father of the ten thousand things.

"It will blunt its own sharpness,

Will its tangles adjust;

It will dim its own radiance

And be one with its dust."

Oh, how calm it seems to remain! I know not whose son it is. Apparently even the Lord it precedes.

The Tao is always used, but never empties. It is eternal and infinite but is nothing. You can't find it even though it is always here. Since it creates everything how can we know who created it.

Direction is the hollow.

Regardless of use, it is inexhaustible.

So unfathomable, as if the source of all matters.

So deep, as if it exists.

I do not know whose offspring Direction is;

it precedes kings.

Way is empty.

Use it: it never needs filling.

An abyss so deep

it seems ancestor to the ten thousand things,

it blunts edges, loosens tangles, softens glare, mingles dust.

A clarity so clear it only seems real,

whose child could it be?

Apparently it precedes gods and creators.

Tao is empty, yet forever inexhaustible.

It is so far-reaching, the source for everything.

Blunting sharpnesses, resolving conflicts, softening lights.

It thus harmonizes the dusty world.

So deep and profound,

It has forever existed.

I do not now whose child it is,

It has existed before the notion of god.

Tao,
like an empty bowl

Being used somehow lacks fullness.

Such
breadth!

It seems to be a model for the 10000 things.

Blunting what is sharp

Untying what is tangled

Harmonizing what is bright

Being together with the dusty earth.

Such
depth!

It seems to somehow exist.

I have no knowledge whose child it is

It appears to precede the emperors.

The Principle produces in abundance, but without filling itself up.

Empty abyss, it seems to be (is) the ancestor (origin) of all beings.

It is peaceful, simple, modest, amiable.

Spilling itself out in waves, it seems to remain (it remains) always the same.

I do not know of whom it is the son (where it comes from). It seems to have been (it was) before the Sovereign.

The Tao is empty

Utilize it, it is not filled up

So deep! It seems to be the source of all things

It blunts the sharpness

Unravels the knots

Dims the glare

Mixes the dusts

So indistinct! It seems to exist

I do not know whose offspring it is

Its image is the predecessor of God

The Tao is like an empty container that you can fill with water and utilize. Yet no matter how much you do this, it will never be filled up because its capacity has no limit. It is a bottomless container; it is infinitely deep.

Despite the emptiness of the Tao, its function is inexhaustible. This emptiness is not the same as "nothingness," for the infinite depths of the Tao conceal the seeds of Creation. There appears to be nothing in the Tao, and yet it contains everything.

The Tao is eternal. It outlasts everything. After millions of year, even the tallest, sharpest mountain peaks will be reduced to gentle rolling hills. After billions of years, even the brightest stars will burn out and shine no more. In the course of time, all problems will be resolved one way or another. The proudest achievements of mankind will be reduced to dust.

The Tao is what we call the source of everything. It is indistinct - we cannot see it clearly, nor can we understand it completely. We do not know how the Tao came to be, or if it came from anywhere at all. Does the ultimate source have a source? We simply cannot say.

All we can say with certainty is that the Tao embodies the principles of Creation. Thus, if there is indeed a God who created the universe, the Tao had to be present before the Creation could take place.

Notes

The Tao is empty; utilize it,

It does not fill up.

The emptiness of the Tao, and its function as the source of all things may seem like a contradiction or a paradox, but this idea happens to coincide with the latest scientific thinking about the origin of the universe.

According to many physicists and cosmologists, the Big Bang can be seen as a singularity event where you actually get "something" from "nothing." MIT professor Dr. Alan Guth expresses it this way: "It is said that there's no such thing as a free lunch. But the universe is the ultimate free lunch."

Blunt their sharpness

Unravel their knots

Dull their glare

Mix their dusts

The Tao is the only constant feature in an ever-changing universe. It has always been there and will always be there. It is entropy, as expressed by the Second Law of Thermodynamics. As time marches on, energy becomes increasingly randomized and dispersed, and all things tend to transition from orderly states to disorderly states, everywhere in the universe.

The Tao appears to be emptiness but it is never exhausted. Oh, it is profound! It appears to have preceded everything. It dulls its own sharpness, unravels its own fetters, softens its own brightness, identifies itself with its own dust.

Oh, it is tranquil! It appears infinite; I do not know from what it proceeds. It even appears to be antecedent to the Lord.

Tao is a whirling emptiness (ch'ung),

Yet (erh) in use (yung) is inexhaustible (ying).

Fathomless (yuan),

It seems to be the ancestor (tsung) of ten thousand beings.

It blunts the sharp,

Unties the entangled,

Harmonizes the bright,

Mixes the dust.

Dark (chan),

It seems perhaps to exist (ts'un).

I do not know whose child it is,

It is an image (hsiang) of what precedes God (Ti).

Tao is a vast immeasurable void. It can be used to infinity; it is truly inexhaustible.

Like nature, it appears to be the origin of everything. In it, conflicts (sharp edges) are satisfied (rounded); differences (tangles) are resolved (united); observations (light) are clarified (tempered); disturbances (turmoil) are quieted (submerged).

It is like a deep, dark pool. I do not know its source. It is like a prelude to nature, a preface to God.

The Tao is empty: used but never used up.

It is the bottomless source of all things.

It blunts sharp edges, unties knots, softens glare, clears dust.

It is hidden, but always present.

I don't know its mother.

It is older than the gods [if there are any gods].

Four

The Tao is an empty vessel; it is used, but never filled.

Oh, unfathomable source of ten thousand things!

Blunt the sharpness,

Untangle the knot,

Soften the glare,

Merge with dust.

Oh, hidden deep but ever present!

I do not know from whence it comes.

It is the forefather of the gods.

The Tao is invisibly empty,

But its use is extremely plentiful.

It is profound like the originator of all things.

It shows no sharpness,

stays away from entanglements,

glows with veiled radiance,

mingles with dust.

It is formless and invisible, but indeed exists.

I do not know where it comes,

It seems to have appeared before the existence of God.

Tao is empty,

You may use it but never fill it.

Fathomless, it is like the progenitor of the ten thousand things.

[It] blunts the sharpness,

Unravels the tangles,

Softens the brilliance,

Identifies with the dust.

Deep and still, it seems as though existing forever.

I don't know whose son it is.

It bears the image of God's forefather.

Dao is akin to an empty vessel.

It is inexhaustible, as if the vessel can never be filled completely.

So deep and unfathomable,

It must be from where all things come forth.

Dao blunts its own sharpness,

Simplifies its own complexity,

Attenuates its own brilliance,

And mingles with the dirt.

Vast and profound, it appears that it could go on forever.

I do not know whose progeny it is.

It was there before the existence of the creator.

Source Non-Existent

Wu Yuan

Tao is hollow, yet its utility

Seems unlikely to reach the limit.

Profound indeed it is;

It seems to be the fount of all things.

It blunts the sharp;

It unravels the tangled;

It harmonizes with the light;

It mingles with the dust.

Calm like a deep pool it seems to remain.

I do not know whose son it is.

It apparently antecedes the Creator.

The Tao is like a hollow vessel that yet cannot be filled to overflowing;

For it is bottomless and unfathomable.

Its infinite depth is the source of all things in the world,

The progenitor of all creatures.

Yet how still and changeless it seems!

In it and through it, all sharp edges are blunted, all knots untied; all glaring light softened; all dust smoothed away.

It is a deep and limpid pool that remains so forever.

We do not know whence it came, we only know it is:

Was it too the offspring of something other than itself?

As an image without substance the Tao is before all things that can be conceived.

Tao is empty! Use it

And it isn't used up.

Deep! It seems like

The forebear of the ten thousand things.

It blunts edges,

Unties tangles,

Harmonizes lights,

Unites all dust.

Existent and deep!

I don't know whose child it is.

It looks to be the source.

The subtle Way of the universe appears to lack strength,

yet its power is inexhaustible.

Fathomless, it could be the origin of all things.

It has no sharpness,

yet it rounds off all sharp edges.

It has no form,

yet it unties all tangles.

It has no glare,

yet it merges all lights.

It harmonizes all things and unites them as one integral whole.

It seems so obscure,

yet it is the Ultimate Clarity.

Whose offspring it is can never be known.

It is that which existed before any divinity.

IV.

Without
Source

The
Tao appears as emptiness, with unreplenished hands,

And
in its vast profundity tis like the sire of all,

It
smoothes the angles in our path, unravels twisted strands,

Softens the glaring light, and fills the
clouds of dust that fall.

How
pure and still the Tao is! as if it would endure

Forever
and forever, oh! whose offspring can it be?

I do
not know whose son it is, its birth is so obscure

It
seems it might have been before God, in eternity!

Tao is infinite.

If we use It, we find It inexhaustible,

Deep!

It appears to be Ancestor of all things.

It rounds our angles. It unravels our difficulties. It harmonizes our Light. It brings our atoms into Unity.

Pure!

It appears to be everlasting in principle.

I do not know whose Son It is,

It existed before God was manifest in Form.

The
Tao (the Law of the Universe) is like

an
empty bowl.

Which
in being used

can
never be filled up

.
So deep it

cannot
be measured,

it
is the

origin
of all things.

It
blurs

all
sharp edges,

It
unties

all
tangles,

It
blends

all
lights,

It
unites the world

into
one whole.

Hidden

in
the depths,

Yet
it seems to

exist
for ever.

I
do not know

whose
child it is;

It
is the common ancestor

of
all,

the
father of all things.

(It
is the Universal Laws from the beginning of our Universe),

To
live by these Laws is to

live
in harmony with our

True
Nature.

The Way is like an empty vessel which, in spite of being used, is never filled. How bottomless it is, like the progenitor of the ten thousand things! How deep it is, as if it will last forever!

Generated by I know not what, it is the Image of what was before the "Emperors".

The Tao is (like) the emptiness of a vessel; and in our

employment of it we must be on our guard against all fulness. How

deep and unfathomable it is, as if it were the Honoured Ancestor of

all things!

We
should blunt our sharp points, and unravel the complications of

things; we should attemper our brightness, and bring ourselves into

agreement with the obscurity of others. How pure and still the Tao

is, as if it would ever so continue!

I
do not know whose son it is. It might appear to have been before

God.

Id is 'empty' yet does not 'refill' with use.
Fathomless Id is;
like the ancestor of the countless things.
Id
wears-down all sharp edges,
unravels all knots,
diffuses light,

mingles with dust.
Id
lies submerged, seeming barely to exist at all.
I know not whose child Id
is!.. only that it seems to be the Womb of God.

This
nothingness is like a well

Always giving, never taking

And all claims to origin

Neither wanting or forsaking

You
know it's ever present

You find it where you have no face

It is a wondrous blessing

Original amazing grace

THE Tao is like an empty bowl,

Which in being used can never be filled up.

Fathomless, it seems to be the origin of all things.

It blunts all sharp edges,

It unties all tangles,

It harmonizes all lights,

It unites the world into one whole.

Hidden in the deeps,

Yet it seems to exist for ever.

I do not know whose child it is;

It seems to be the common ancestor of all, the father of things.

The Tao is an inexhaustible container, as much of itself that it pours out, still there is more left.

It blunts the sharpness, untangles the knots and softens the glare.

Its depths are hidden, universal and eternal.

I don't know where it came from,

It existed before the beginning.

The Tao is like an empty container:

it can never be emptied and can never be filled.

Infinitely deep, it is the source of all things.

It dulls the sharp, unties the knotted,

shades the lighted, and unites all of creation with dust.

It
is hidden but always present.

I don't know who gave birth to it.

It is older than the concept of God.

Dig as deep as you will, you will never come to a thing called Tao or God. Tao is not a thing. Tao is a principle or law. Tao means how.

All things behave according to Tao, but Tao does not behave. Tao is never an object or a process.

Tao is the law of all things, of all events. Tao is the common ground of all creation.

Creation consists of things and events. All things and events are vibratory. Vibration consists of opposites or polarities. Polarities may cooperate with one another, or they may conflict to varying degrees.

All things and events, whether they are cooperative or conflicting, harmonious or turbulent, take their form and become resolved in accordance with Tao.

But Tao is not a vibratory event. Tao is not, for example, a sound. Tao has no opposites or polarities. Tao is one; Tao is unity.

As far as I know, nothing comes before Tao. Nothing made Tao. Nothing created God.

The Tao is like an empty pitcher,

Poured from, but never drained.

Infinitely deep, it is the source of All things.

It blunts the sharp,

Unties the knotted,

Shades the bright,

Unites with All Dust.

Dimly seen, yet eternally present,

I do not know who gave birth to it,

It is older than any conception of God.

Infinity
is an empty vessel enveloping all

manifestations,

yet it can never be filled.

It
is the potential of all things tangible and

intangible.

It
blunts the sharp and hones the blunt,

unravels knots and binds all things,

dulls the glare and shines the mundane,

manifests the dust and clears the air.

It
is the essence of all things.

No one can comprehend its origin.

It
is older than the concept of God.

Tao is empty; and when used, never fills up.

It is Deep, like the ancestor of all things.

Round the edges,

end the separation,

merge with the light,

join with the dust.

It is clear, yet still seems to exist.

I do not know whose child it is.

It is older than the appearance of Ti.

The Tao is like an empty vessel, yet may be drawn from without ever needing to be filled.1

In its unfathomable depths arise the Ten Thousand Things.

It blunts sharp edges,

Unties all tangles;

It softens the glare

And blends with the dust.1

Hidden in the depths, perhaps it just seems to exist.

Its origin is a mystery to me.

It seems to be older than Heaven.

1. Waley (1977, 146) observes, 'Dust is the Taoist symbol for the noise and fuss of everyday life.' The Tao exists everywhere – even in ch'en, dust.

The Way is open for endless use

And will never fill up.

Like an endless valley

It blunts the sharpness,

Dissolves the currents,

Softens the intense light,

Assimilates all substances.

Is it being or non-being?

I don't know which son takes after which father.

Tao being Empty, it seems one who uses it will lack solidity.

An abyss, it seems something like the ancestor of the thousands of things.

It dampens the passion it unties the tangles it makes the flashing things harmonious it makes the dust merge together.

Deep, it is perhaps like an enduring something.

I don't know of anything whose offspring it might be - it appears to precede God.

Tao looks like void. Yet, It is omnipotent!

It is in the Depth.*

It is the Origin of everything.

It controls everything.

It pervades everything.

It is Shining Light.

It is the subtlest!

It is the Main Essence of everything!

One cannot describe Its origin, for It is Primal.

* In the depth of multidimensionality. In other words, at the "subtle" end of the multidimensional scale.

Tao is empty, its use infinite.

It is very deep, seams to be the root of everything.

It looks like doesn't have an end.

I do not know who originated it,

It seams to be before the Creator Himself.

The
Dao is void, yet when it is put to use it would seem that it cannot be filled
up. Abyss-like, it seems to be the ancestor of the myriad creatures. It dulls
their sharpness, releases their tangles, harmonizes their brightness, and unites
their dust. It is deep-entering, as though existing. I do not know whose progeny
it is, but it images the state before God.

Tao is empty, used yet never filled.

It is deep, like the forefather of all things.

It dulls sharpness, and sorts tangles,

Blends with the light, becoming one with the dust.

So serene, as if it hardly existed.

I do not know whose son it is.

It seems to have preceded God.

The Nature of the Tao

The Tao is empty and yet useful;

Somehow it never fills up.

So profound!

It resembles the source of All Things.

It blunts the sharpness,

Unties the tangles,

And harmonizes the brightness.

It identifies with the ways of the world.

So deep!

It resembles a certain existence.

I do not know whose offspring it is,

This Image in front of the source.

Each day I enjoy tea. I talk of it often. I have a wooden container I use each morning to draw water from the well. I bring the water into my home and heat it over a fire. I choose a tea to steep and then enjoy it while watching the sunrise. Each morning I take what I need from the well. Each morning it provides. It has always been there. Perhaps it always will.

The Way is a void,

Used but never filled:

An abyss it is,

Like an ancestor

From which all things come.

It
blunts sharpness,

Resolves tangles;

It tempers light,

Subdues turmoil.

A
deep pool it is,

Never to run dry!

Whose offspring it may be

I do not know:

It is like a preface to God.

Tao is invisible, but its usefulness cannot be exhausted.

It is so fathomless, like the ancestor of all things.

It covers its cutting edge,

It transcends entanglement,

It contains its light,

It mixes with its dust.

It has no form or image, but actually it exists.

I don't know where it was born of,

(I only know) it appeared before the Lord.

The vessel of the Dao is empty, so use it but do not try to refill it.

It is such an abyss, oh, that it appears to be the progenitor of the myriad things.

It blunts the sharp, cuts away the tangled, merges with the brilliant, and becomes one with the very dust.

Its depth is so deep, oh, that it seems somehow to exist.

I do not know whose child it could be, for it appears to have been born before the Lord.

1. The Way is empty;

2. Yet when you use it, you never need fill it again.

3. Like an abyss! It seems to be the ancestor of the ten thousand things.

4.
If files down sharp edges;

5. Unties the tangles;

6. Softens the glare;

7. And settles the dust.

8.
Submerged! It seems perhaps to exist.

9. We don't know whose child it is;

10. It seems to have [even] preceded the Lord.

How much Tao
is there?

More than you'll ever need.

Use as much as you want,

there's plenty more where that came from.

You can't see
Tao, but it's there.

Damned if I know where it came from.

It's just always been around.

.

The Infinite Way

The Way is infinite; its use is never exhausted.

It is bottomless, like the fountainhead of all things.

It smoothes its roughness; it unties its tangles.

It softens its light; it calms its turmoil.

Deep and still, ever present.

I do not know its source.

It seems to have existed before the Lord.

Unfathomable in its depth Tao is the primordial ground of all life.

Because it is empty it is the origin of fullness and remain while producing fulfillment forever unmoved and unfilled.

Empty it is the primordial matrix and center of all beings.

It softens the discord it unravels their entanglement it effaces appearance and unites them in Being.

Because it is still it is inaudible.

Unmoved it is all creative.

Unborn it is older than God.

The Character Of The Tao

Lao Tze says,

The Tao in the void state works on everything.

It guards against fullness.

Its depth is unfathomable, as if it were the honored ancestor of all things.

It blunts the sharp points, sets in order the tangles, tempers the light, and agrees with the obscurity of others.

How pure and still the Tao is, as if it would ever stand.

I do not know its origin, and it seems to have existed before the coming of all gods.

THE UNFATHOMABLE TAO

It
is the nature of the Tao,

that even though used continuously,

it is replenished naturally,

never being emptied,

and never being over-filled,

as is a goblet

which spills its contents

upon the ground.

The
Tao therefore cannot be said

to waste its charge,

but constantly remains

a source of nourishment

for those who are not so full of self

as to be unable to partake of it.

When tempered beyond its natural state,

the finest blade will lose its edge.

Even the hardest tempered sword,

against water, is of no avail,

and will shatter if struck against a rock.

When untangled by a cutting edge,

the cord in little pieces lies,

and is of little use.

Just
as the finest swordsmith

tempers the finest blade

with his experience,

so the sage, with wisdom, tempers intellect.

With patience, tangled cord may be undone,

and problems which seem insoluble, resolved.

With
wise administrators, all can exist in unity,

each with the other,

because no man need feel that he exists,

only as the shadow of his brilliant brother.

Through
conduct not contrived for gain,

awareness of the Tao may be maintained.

This is how its mysteries may be found.

The Tao is like a well:

used but never used up.

It is like the eternal void:

filled with infinite possibilities.

It is hidden but always present.

I don't know who gave birth to it.

It is older than God.

Dao is charged to produce these gases into orderly use.

The eternal capacity will never overflow.

Profoundly!

It is the ancestor of All Things!

It blunts all sharpness;

it settles all disputes;

it harmonizes all lights and it unites all lands.

The clear mind will be constantly receptive.

We do not know whose descent it is.

It existed before all phenomena and all lives.

Tao functions in empty harmony.

When used, it remains full.

For sure, this source is the very ancestor of the myriad things.

Blunting the sharp edges,

Unraveling the tangles,

Husbanding into the light,

Being as ordinary as the dust.

Ah! Limpid, it seems to exist forever.

I do not know whose son it is,

This who is exceeding the Heavenly Emperor.

IV

The
way is emptiness,

Yet practice it and it seems inexhaustible

Fathomless and still,

Yet all life seems to spring from it

It
blunts sharp edges

Unravels knots

Softens glare

Settles the dust

It
moves beneath all things, seen only in its effects

Where it came from no one can say

It was always there, the potential in nothingness

The Way Is Unimpeded Harmony

The Way is unimpeded harmony;

its potential may never be fully exploited.

It is as deep as the source of all things:

it blunts the edges,

resolves the complications,

harmonizes the light,

assimilates to the world.

Profoundly still, it seems to be there:

I don't know whose child it is,

before the creation of images.

Tao is abstract, their applicability is inexhaustible.

Abyss appears to be the origin of everything.

Deepness appears to be where the intangible exists.

Smoothening sharp edges;

Resolving conflicts;

Harmonizing glares;

Blending into the earth.

I do not know from where the theory comes, it appears to come from our late ancestors.

The Way is like an empty bowl, which is never used up.

Fathomless, it seems to be the origin of all things.

It blunts all sharp edges; it unties all tangles; it harmonizes all lights; it unites the worldly dusts.

Hidden in the deeps, yet it seems to exist forever.

I do not know whose child it is; it seems to be the common ancestor of all, the father of things.

Tao floods, never over flow, we use it,

As a stream, as the source of everything.

Blunt the sharp,

Untangle the knotted,

Soften the glare,

Merge with dust.

Hidden, yet seemingly present!

I do not know from whence it comes.

Forefather of gods.

The Tao is like an empty bowl,

yet it may be used

without ever needing to be filled.

It is the deep and unfathomable source

of the ten thousand things.

Blunt
the sharpness.

Untie the knot.

Soften the glare.

Settle with the dust.

It
is hidden deep yet ever present.

I do not know whose child it is.

It existed before the common ancestor.

Atheism
is an empty bowl:

it cannot be filled

neither does it need filling.

It is at the beginning of all human consciousness

and is even the origin of theism.

Soften the sharpness

stop the debate

dissolve the confusion

reduce the glare

become like dust.

Like
a spring-fed pool in a quiet forest

it has no bottom

no beginning

no end.

Is
atheism born from theism?

No one knows.

But it is

the natural state

of all being.

Dao is like an empty vessel that yet can be drawn from

without ever needing to be filled.

It's without bottom;

the very breeder of all things in the world.

In it all sharpness is blunted,

all tangles untied,

all glare tempered,

all turmoil smoothed.

It's like a deep pool that never dries.

Was it too the child of something else?

We can hardly tell.

A substanceless image of all things seemed to exist before the progenitor that
we hardly know of.

The Way is empty, yet never refills with use;

Bottomless it is, like the forefather of the myriad creatures.

It files away sharp points,

unravels tangles,

diffuses light,

mingles with the dust.

Submerged it lies,

seeming barely to subsist.

I know not whose child it is,

only that it resembles the predecessor of God.

Tao is without limitation; its depth is the source of whatsoever is.

It makes shard things round, it brings order out of chaos, it obscures the brilliant, it is wholly without attachment.

I do not know who gave it birth; it is more ancient than God.

See Clearly

Your love is a great mystery.

It is like an eternal lake

whose waters are always still and clear like glass.

Looking into it you can see

the truth about your life.

It is like a deep well

whose waters are cool and pure.

Drinking from it you can be reborn.

You do not have to stir the waters

or dig the well.

Merely see yourself clearly

and drink deeply.

You don't need,

"Ten Tidy Tips to Tantalize Your Mate."

You need to look deeply into each other's eyes

for fifteen minutes,

no less.

Hold hands.

Breathe deeply.

No talking.

Don't be afraid.

What do you see?

Tao is empty (like a bowl). It may be used but its capacity is never exhausted

It is bottomless, perhaps the ancestor of all things.

It blunts its sharpness. It unties its tangles. It softens its light. It becomes one with the dusty world.

Deep and still, it appears to exist forever.

I do not know whose son it is. It seems to have existed before the Lord.

Existence, by
nothing bred,

Breeds everything.

Parent of the universe,

It smooths rough edges,

Unties hard knots,

Tempers the sharp sun,

Lays blowing dust,

Its image in the wellspring never fails.

But how was it conceived?--this image

Of no other sire.

The DAO looks empty, but it can last forever.

It is so deep, it can be the ancestor of everything.

It dulls its sharpness, unties itself from the outside world,

Dims its brightness, and makes itself like dust.

It is so elusive, yet seems present.

I do not know its origin;

It should exist before the God that people worship.

Empty of all doctrines,

The Tao is wisdom eternally inexhaustible.

Fathomless for the mere intellect,

The Tao is the law wherewith all things come into being.

It blunts the edges of the intellect,

Untangles the knots of the mind,

Softens the glare of thinking,

And settles the dust of thought.

Transparent yet invisible,

The Tao exists like deep pellucid water.

Its origin is unknown,

For it existed before Heaven and Earth.

The Way is open for endless use

And will never fill up.

Like an endless valley

It blunts the sharpness,

Dissolves the currents,

Softens the intense light,

Assimilates all substances.

Is it being or non-being?

I don't know which son takes after which father.

The Tao is an inexhaustible container, as much of itself that it pours out, still there is more left.

It blunts the sharpness, untangles the knots and softens the glare.

Its depths are hidden, universal and eternal.

I don't know where it came from,

It existed before the beginning.

