===== Chapter 49 =====

The sages are without fixed minds.

Therefore, the hundred clans' mind

Do [the sages] take to be [their own] mind.

Those who are good, I am good to them.

Those who are not good, I am also good to them.

[This is] virtue [as] goodness.

Those who are sincere, I am sincere to them.

Those who are not sincere, I am also sincere to them.

[This is] virtue [as] sincerity.

The sages living in the world thereupon take everything in

Acting in the world, merging their minds.

The hundred clans—each one—pays attention with its ears and eyes.

The sages all treat them as children.

The Sage has no set heart. Ordinary people's hearts Become the Sage's heart.

People who are good I treat well. People who are not good I also treat well: Te as goodness.

Trustworthy people I trust. Untrustworthy people I also trust. Te as trust.

Sages create harmony under heaven Blending their hearts with the world.
Ordinary people fix their eyes and ears upon them, But Sages become the
world's children.

The sage does not have fixed ideas.

He lets the thoughts of the others become his own.

He is good to those who are good

And to those who are not good.

Virtue is good.

He is faithful to those who are faithful

And to those who are not faithful.

Virtue is faithful.

The sage lives united with the world

And he allows his thoughts to embrace all.

The people fix on him their eyes and ears:

He seems to behave like a little child.

COMMUNITY OF HEART

Having an open and unconditioned mind -

Foregoing preconceived opinions and feelings -

The Sage regards the opinions and feelings

of the people as his own.

Being good and kind to the good and kindly -

Being good and kind to the evil and unkindly -

Goodness and kindliness are attained,

For Te is absolutely good and kind.

Being faithful and honest to the faithful and honest -

Being faithful and honest to the unfaithful, liar and cheat -

Faithfulness and honesty are attained,

For Te is absolutely faithful and honest.

The Sage:

Acting humble and shy,

may appear confused to an objective world.

But subtly, in a peaceful and harmonious manner,

Regarding all as his children,

Brings the world into a community of heart.

The sage has the emptiness of the eternal center.

Thus the center of the hundred families (all families) becomes the center.

Goodness - people are good.

Those who are not good - they are also good because the action of their soul is good.

Trust - people can be trusted.

Those who cannot be trusted - they can also be trusted because the action of their soul can be trusted.

The sage lives peacefully in Heaven below (the sacred body).

The peaceful action of Heaven below is like an ocean at its center.

The sage is like a child ready to smile at everyone.

THE ADAPTABILITY OF THE THE

The wise man hath no fixed principle; he adapteth his mind to his

environment.

To
the good I am good, and to the evil I am good also; thus all become

good. To the true I am true, and to the false I am true; thus all become

true.

The
sage appeareth hesitating to the world, because his mind is detached.

Therefore the people look and listen to him, as his children; and thus

doth he shepherd them.

The sage has no invariable smind of his own; he makes the mind of thepeople his mind. To those who are good (to me), I am good; and to thosewho are not (to me), I am also good,-and thus (all) get to be good. Tothose who are sincere (with me), I am sincere; and to those who are notsincere (with me), i am also sincere;-and thus (all) get to be sincere.The sage has in the world an appearance of indecision, and keeps his mindin a state of indifference to all. The people all keep their eyes and earsdirected to him, and he deals with them all as his children.

A wise man has no opinion at all

Therefore he can easily put himself in someone else's position

He accepts everybody and everything for what it is

In spite of any behaviour

He trusts the honest and the unfair

And naturally they become fair-minded

He trusts the reliable and the unreliable

And naturally all will become reliable

A wise man feels one with all people

They are all just as precious to him

They look and listen to him

And all are as children to him

The intelligent man is not willful. He accepts what others will for themselves as his will for them.

Those who appear as good, he accepts, And those who appear as bad, he accepts; For Nature accepts both.

Those who appear faithful, he accepts, And those who appear unfaithful, he accepts; For Nature accepts both.

The intelligent man treats every kind of nature impartially, And will good to one as much as the another. All people admire the intelligent man, Because he regards them all as a mother regards her children.

The Sage has no heart of his own;

He uses the heart of the people as his heart.

Of the good man I approve,

But of the bad I also approve,

And thus he gets goodness.

The truthful man I believe, but the liar I also believe,

And thus he gets truthfulness.

The Sage, in the dealings with the world, seems like one dazed with fright;

For the world's sake be dulls his wits.

The Hundred Families all the time strain their eyes and ears,

The Sage all the time sees and hears no more than an infant sees and hears.

The sage has no heart or mind of his own.

Thus, he knows the heart and mind of all.

I am good to the good

and good to the not-so-good.

This is the goodness of Virtue.

I trust the trustworthy

and have faith in those who should not be trusted.

This is the faith of Virtue.

The sage is in harmony

with the realm of heaven and earth.

His mind is merged with the world.

People turn to him and listen.

He treats them as his children.

Wise ones have no set mind

Regarding the hundred families' minds as "mind"

To those who are good we have good to extend

To those who are less than good we also have good to extend

To merit goodness

To those who are true we have truth to extend

To those who are less than true we also have truth to extend

To merit truth

Wise ones are in the world

Uniting, connecting, adopting the world

Merging with their hearts

The hundred families, as one, pay heed,

with their "hearkening" & "beholding"

The wise ones, as one, come to laugh like children

The world of others

The Sage constantly has no mind of his own.

He takes the mind of the common people as his mind.

Those who are good, he regards as good.

Those who are not good, he regards also as good.

In this way he attains goodness.

Those who are trustworthy, he trusts.

Those who are not trustworthy, he also trusts.

[In this way] he gets their trust.

As for the Sage's presence in the world - he is one with it.

And with the World he merges his mind.

The common people all fix their eyes and ears on him.

And the Sage treats them all as his children.

The sage has no set mind. She adopts the concerns of others as her own.

She is good to the good. She is also good to the bad. This is real goodness.

She trusts the trustworthy. She also trusts the untrustworthy. This is real trust.

The sage takes the minds of the worldly and spins them around. People drop their ideas and agendas, and she guides them like beloved children.

The Sage is free of the law of fixed belief;

It reflects the heart of every seeker.

Where sincerity is revealed,

The Sage responds in kind.

Where one's true self is repressed,

The Sage remains sincere.

Loyally approach the Sage,

And your loyalty will be returned.

Doubtfully approach the Sage,

And your doubt will be returned

In truthful Modesty.

The nature of the Sage dwells in humility;

In humility may it be experienced.

Humility is the breath of the Cosmos.

Thus do people in their deepest hearts

Call out, as children of the earth,

To their Cosmic Mother.

Wherever humility exists, the Sage approaches, ready to help and to teach, for "humility is the breath of the Cosmos." Humility is the sincere act of "calling out," in the sense of simply asking the Sage for help in understanding, while completely suspending both belief and disbelief. This is what makes true learning possible in the Way. Error is never a life sentence, but is itself a part of the learning process. The Sage returns a doubting approach with "truthful Modesty," and in this there is the possibility of growth and a return to sincerity and humility. When we are able to drop, or at least suspend, the attitude of fixed belief, we are then approaching the Sage with the necessary sincerity and humility for it to respond.

The truly wise are selfless.

People's needs are their needs.

The
good are treated with goodness;

the bad are also treated with goodness;

this is the goodness of Teh.

The
faithful are treated with faith;

the faithless are treated with faith;

this is the faith of Teh.

The
truly wise live peacefully and impartially.

In their eyes people share a common heritage.

The truly wise accept all people as their own family.

The Holy Man is not inflexible, he plans according to the needs of the people.

I would return good for good. I would also return good for evil. Thus goodness operates (or "thus all become good").

I would return trust for trust. I would also return trust for suspicion. Thus trust operates (or "thus all become trustworthy").

The Holy Man as he dwells in the world is very apprehensive concerning it, blending his heart with the whole. Most men plan for themselves. The Holy Man treats every one as a child.

The Sage has no self to call his own.

He makes the self of the people his self.

To the good I act with goodness;

To the bad I also act with godness:

Thus goodness is attained.

To the faithful I act with faith;

To the faithless I also act with faith:

Thus faith is attained.

The Sage lives in the world in concord, and rules ovet the world in simplicity.

Yet what all the people turn their eyes and ears to,

The Sage looks after as a mother does her children.

Sage's Constancy

Sages lack a constant heart-mind;

they deem the public's heart-mind as heart-mind.

Things which are worthy, I 'worthy'.

Things which are unworthy, I also 'worthy'

This treats 'worthy'-ing as a virtuosity.

Things which are reliable, I 'reliable'.

Things which are unreliable, I also 'reliable'

This treats 'reliable'-ing as a virtuosity.

A sage is in the social world is like an outcast.

Deem-acting for the social world, he addles his heart-mind.

Sages all 'child' themselves.

The wise man is free from his own mind,

But identifies the people's minds as mind.

He considers good as good,

But he also considers not-good as good.

Thus, his attainment of non-differentiation is successful.

He considers truth as truth,

But he also considers not-truth as truth.

Thus, his attainment of non-differentiation is perfected.

In the world, the wise conscientiously non-differentiates

The minds of the people.

Because people rely on their senses of hearing and seeing,

The wise treats them as innocent children.

The sage has no mind of his own.

He takes the minds of the people as his own.

Whatever others like, he likes too.

Whatever others dislike, he likes too.

This is what is meant by virtuous goodness.

Whatever others trust, he trusts too.

Whatever others mistrust, he trusts too.

This is what is meant by virtuous trust.

The sage leads his life with vigilance.

He merges his mind with all others' under Heaven.

People are used to hearing and seeing the behaviour of the sage and so they are influenced, and become pure again, as a newborn child.

The sage man never had a predisposed heart,

Taking the hundred family's heart

To be the concern of his heart.

Good people - he was good to them;

Evil people - he was also good to them.

Goodness was attained.

Honest people - he was honest to them;

Dishonest people - he was also honest to them.

Honesty was attained.

When the sage man presided over the empire,

Unbiased, he muddled their hearts

For all under heaven.

The hundred family names

All lent him their ears and eyes;

The sage man turned them all into infants.

The sage has no self that he can call "mine,"

He turns the self of the people into his own.

I act with goodness toward the good,

I act with goodness toward the bad, too,

And so the good is contagious.

I relate with trust to the person who is worthy of trust,

I relate with trust to the person who is not worthy of trust, too,

And so trust is contagious.

The sage lives in the world in his victory and rules the world with his simplicity.

But when all the people look at him and listen to him,

The sage takes care of them, like a mother takes care of her children.

The sage has no mind of his own.

He takes as his own the mind of the people.

Those
who are good I treat as good.

Those who are not good I also treat as good.

In so doing I gain in goodness.

Those who are of good faith I have faith in.

Those who are lacking in good faith I also have faith in.

In so doing I gain in good faith.

The
sage in his attempt to distract the mind of the empire seeks urgently to muddle
it.

The people all have something to occupy their eyes and ears, and the sage treats
them all like children.

Trust in Virtue

The holy man has not a heart of his own. The hundred families' hearts he makes his heart.

The good I meet with goodness; the bad I also meet with goodness; that is virtue's goodness. The faithful I meet with faith; the faithless I also meet with faith; that is virtue's faith.

The holy man dwells in the world anxious, very anxious in his dealings with the world. He universalizes his heart, and the hundred families fix upon him their ears and eyes. The holy man treats them all like children.

The master has no fixed ideas, but accepts whatever comes his way. His is an unbending trust in existence, so he treats all the same. He trusts that a good man is doing the right thing. He also trusts that a bad man is doing the right thing. He keeps his trust a secret, knowing others cannot understand. He appears to be like a child.

The sage has no preconceived notion at any time;

the people's notion is the sage's notion.

I treat a person, who is good, well;

I treat a person, who is not good, also well.

This is for goodness's sake.

I trust a person who is worthy of trust;

I also trust a person who is not worthy of trust.

This is for trustworthiness's sake.

The sage, in governing the world, holds back personal notions in favor of the people's.

The sage treats the people, focusing on themselves, as infants.

A sage's mind is never his own:

he makes the hundred-fold people's mind his mind.

I treat the noble with nobility

and the ignoble too:

such is the nobility of Integrity.

I treat the sincere with sincerity

and the insincere too:

such is the sincerity of Integrity.

A sage dwells within all beneath heaven

at ease, mind mingled through it all.

The hundred-fold people devote their eyes and ears,

but a sage inhabits it all like a child.

A wise ruler has no preconceived ideas,

He adopts the people's ideas as his own.

I treat good people with goodness,

I treat bad people also with goodness.

This is the virtue of goodness.

I deal with honest people with honesty,

I deal with dishonest people also with honesty.

This is the virtue of honesty.

For the benefit of the world, the wise ruler harmonizes all ideas.

(The people pay attention to him through ears and eyes,)

And he treats them all like his children.

Sages
are entirely absent of mind

It happens that the mind of the one hundred families acts as a mind.

Those
who are valued I am valuing

Those who lack value I also am valuing

Ideal valuing.

Those who are believed I am believing

Those who are not believed I also am believing

Ideal believing.

Sages
in the world inhale

Inhale, act, mix with the mind of the world.

The
one hundred families concentrate their ears and eyes

Sages are each being children.

The Sage has no definite will of his own, he accommodates himself to the will of the people.

He treats the good and the bad equally well, which is the true practice of goodness.

He trusts the sincere and insincere alike, which is the true practice of trust.

In this mixed-up world, the Sage is without any emotion, and has the same feelings for all. All men fix their eyes and ears on him. He treats them like children, (Daoism kindliness, sightly disdainful).

The sages have no constant mind

They take the mind of the people as their mind

Those who are good, I am good to them

Those who are not good, I am also good to them

Thus the virtue of goodness

Those who believe, I believe them

Those who do not believe, I also believe them

Thus the virtue of belief

The sages live in the world

They cautiously merge their mind for the world

The people all pay attention with their ears and eyes

The sages care for them as children

Tao sages are not closed minded or dogmatic. They do not have inflexible, fixed ideas that can never change. They do not assume that they are always right, so when their opinions differ from those of the people, they will examine alternative perspectives carefully. If the people's ideas have merit, the sages are happy to adopt them as their own.

The compassion of the sages is truly universal. They treat people well, whether or not they are deserving of kindness, because the sages do not prejudge them. They also have enduring faith in the basic decency of humanity. They trust everyone, whether or not a person is trustworthy. In short, the sages expect goodness from people and get it, because people cannot help but raise their own standards to live up to the goodness that the sages see in them.

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF TRUST

The wise man has no fixed heart; in the hearts of the people he finds his own. The good he treats with goodness; the not-good he also treats with goodness, for teh is goodness. The faithful ones he treats with good faith; the unfaithful he also treats with good faith, for teh is good faith.

The wise man lives in the world but he lives cautiously, dealing with the world cautiously. He universalizes his heart; the people give him their eyes and ears, but he treats them as his children.

The sage has no set mind (ch'ang hsin),

He takes the mind of the people as his mind.

The good (shan) I am good to them,

The not good I am also good to them.

This is the goodness of nature (te).

The trustworthy (hsin) I trust them,

The not trustworthy I also trust them.

This is the trust of nature (te).

The sage in the world,

Mixes (hun) the minds (hsin) of all.

The people lift up their eyes and ears,

The sage treats them all like children.

The truly wise areselfless; people's needs are their needs.

The good are treated with goodness; the bad are also treated with goodness; this is the goodness of Teh.

The faithful are treated with faith; the faithless are also treated with faith; this is the faith of Teh.

The truly wise are peacefully and impartially. In their eyes people share a common heritage. The truly wise accept all people as their own family.

The Tao–Master does not have his heart set on anything in particular.

He wants to understand the hearts of the people.

He is good to people who are good.

He is also good to people who aren't good.

This is true goodness.

He trusts people who are trustworthy.

He also trusts people who aren't trustworthy.

This is true trust.

The Tao–Master radiates peace and harmony.

Through him, the hearts of the people are made one.

Are the people his children, or is he their child?

Forty-nine

The sage has no mind of his own.

He is aware of the needs of others.

I am good to people who are good.

I am also good to people who are not good.

Because Virtue is goodness.

I have faith in people who are faithful.

I also have faith in people who are not faithful.

Because Virtue is faithfulness.

The
sage is shy and humble - to the world he seems confusing.

Others look to him and listen.

He behaves like a little child.

The sage often has no will,

He takes the people's will as his own.

What is good I treat with goodness;

What is not good I also treat with goodness.

Thus I obtain goodness.

Those who are of faith, I put faith in;

Those who are of no faith, I also put faith in.

Thus I obtain faith.

When the sage governs the world,

He simplifies his as well as the people's minds.

The people are all preoccupied with their eyes and ears,

The sage helps them return to the childhood state.

The sage has no fixed mind;

He takes the people's mind as his own.

I accept as good those who are good;

I also accept as good those who are not good.

Such is Te's goodness.

I trust those who trust;

I also trust those who do not trust.

Such is Te's trust.

The sage, in ruling all under Heaven,

Makes his mind one with it.

All his subjects set their ears and eyes on him.

He regards them all as his children.

The sage has no preconceived ideas.

He simply takes the lead from his subjects.

He treats the good people with kindness.

He also treats the bad people with kindness.

He thus cultivates the virtue of kindness.

He treats those who are trustworthy with sincerity.

He also treats those who are not trustworthy with sincerity.

Thus, he is cultivating the virtue of sincerity.

The sage always handles his affairs in an amicable way.

He steers his subjects towards a simple and unpretentious life.

Everyone pays attention to him and asks for guidance.

He nurtures them tenderly as if caring for babies.

Trust in Virtue

Ren Teh

The Sage has no fixed state of mind;

His reflects the state of mind of the people.

To the good, I show goodness;

To the not good, I also show goodness;

Hence goodness is realized.

To the sincere, I show sincerity;

To the insincere, I also show sincerity;

Hence sincerity is realized.

While in the world, the Sage is very anxious

To harmonize his mind for the harmony of the world.

To him all the people turn their eyes and ears;

He treats them all alike as children.

The Sage's self is not a self for itself;

He makes the people's self his self.

I am good to the good;

To the bad I am also good.

For how shall Virtue express itself if not in goodness?

I am candid to the candid;

To those who are not frank I am also candid.

How shall Virtue express itseld if not in candour?

The Sage, always absorbing, lives in stillness in the world,

But his heart is open to receive the conflicting impressions of the world.

And the people of the world gaze at him round-eyed and agape,

And he treats them as children.

The sage has no fixed heart.

He finds his heart

In the hundred families' heart.

He is good to the good;

He is also good to the not-good,

For virtue is good.

He is faithful to the faithful;

He is also faithful to the unfaithful,

For virtue is faithful.

Living beneath heaven,

The sage deals shyly with beneath-heaven

And simplifies his heart.

The hundred families strain eyes and ears;

The sage acts the child to all of them.

One with wholeness of virtue has an unconditioned mind.

He regards the mind of all being as his own mind.

He is kind to the kind.

He is also kind to the unkind,

for the subtle nature of the universe is kind.

He is faithful to the faithful.

He is also faithful to the unfaithful,

for the integral virtue of the universe is undeceiving.

In the midst of the world,

he dissolves all minds into harmonious Oneness.

All people strain their eyes and ears for excitement.

One of deep virtue brings all people back to their childlike-heartedness.

XLIX.

True
Virtue

The
sage s heart is not unchangeable,

He
makes his own the people s heart and will,

To
those who are good I, too, will be good,

To
those who are not-good I will be good still,

Virtue
is ever good;

Those
who are faithful I will meet with faith,

The
unfaithful also shall have my good will,

Virtue
is our faithhood.

The
sage dwells in the world, with thoughtfulness,

But
his heart flows in sympathy with all,

The
people turn their eyes and ears to him,

And
are to him his children, great or small.

The Heart of the self-controlled man is always in the Inner Kingdom.

He draws the hearts of all men into his Heart.

If a man is good, he blesses him;

If a man is not good, still he blesses him with the Blessing of Teh.

If a man is faithful, he is faithful to him,

If a man is not faithful, still he is faithful to him with the Faithfulness of Teh.

The self-controlled man dwells in the world.

Patiently and persistently

He brings the whole world into active community of Heart.

All men turn their ears and their eyes towards him.

They are all children of the self-controlled man.

The Complete Thinker

has no interests

of their own,

But takes

the interests

of the people

as their own.

They are kind

to the kind;

They are also kind

to the not kind:

Kindness is Power.

They are faithful

to the faithful

They are also faithful

to the not faithful:

Faithfulness is Power.

In the middle of the world,

the Complete Thinker

is shy and

does not brag.

For the world

they keep their heart

in its largest state.

All the people

try to listen and see:

The Complete Thinker

acts without prejudice.

The Saint has no fixed mind. He makes the mind of the people his own, (saying): "The good I treat well, and the not-good I also treat well; thus I obtain goodness. Those of good faith I treat with good faith, and those not of good faith I also treat with good faith; thus I obtain good faith."

The Saint in Al-under-heaven makes no distinctions; he makes his heart impartial towards All-under-heaven. The people rivet their ears and eyes on him, and the Saint treats them all like infants.

The sage has no invariable mind of his own; he makes the mind

of the people his mind.

To
those who are good (to me), I am good; and to those who are not

good (to me), I am also good;--and thus (all) get to be good. To

those who are sincere (with me), I am sincere; and to those who are

not sincere (with me), I am also sincere;--and thus (all) get to be

sincere.

The
sage has in the world an appearance of indecision, and keeps

his mind in a state of indifference to all. The people all keep their

eyes and ears directed to him, and he deals with them all as his

children.

Sages never have a mind of their own;
they consider the minds of the
common people to be their mind.
Treat
well those who are 'good.'
Also treat well those who are 'not good.'

This is Goodness ATTAINED.
Be
sincere to the sincere.
Also be sincere to the insincere.
This is Sincerity
ATTAINED.
Sages
are self-effacing in their dealings with all under heaven,
and bemuddle their
own minds for the sake of others.
The
common people all rivet their eyes and ears upon them,
and Sages make them
giggle like children!

The
seer doesn't own a thought

For thoughts do not reside within

Thoughts concern ten thousand things

And that's the way it's always been

The
seer doesn't rush to judge

And treats all people well

Considers no one bad or good

Attracts but never does repel

The
seer trusts things as they are

And takes all people at their word

Giving trust to everyone

Knows faithfulness will be returned

The
seer turns your view around

So you can never be beguiled

And gives you back all that you lost

The vision of a little child

THE Sage has no interests of his own,

But takes the interests of the people as his own.

He is kind to the kind;

He is also kind to the unkind:

For Virtue is kind.

He is faithful to the faithful;

He is also faithful to the unfaithful:

For Virtue is faithful.

In the midst of the world, the Sage is shy and self-effacing.

For the sake of the world he keeps his heart in its nebulous state.

All the people strain their ears and eyes:

The Sage only smiles like an amused infant.

The master has no subjective conceptions,

His heart is open to the people.

He is kind to the kind.

He is also kind to the unkind.

This is the true practice of kindness.

To the honest he is trusting,

To the dishonest he is also trusting,

This is the true practice of trust.

The sage appears hesitant, and lives in harmonious peace in the world,

He considers his own mind as well as that of the people.

The people look to him lending their eyes and ears, and he treats them all as his children.

The Master has no mind of her own.

She understands the mind of the people.

To
those who are good she treats as good.

To those who aren't good she also treats as good.

This is how she attains true goodness.

She
trusts people who are trustworthy.

She also trusts people who aren't trustworthy.

This is how she gains true trust.

The
Master's mind is shut off from the world.

Only for the sake of the people does she muddle her mind.

They look to her in anticipation. Yet she treats them all as her children.

The wise leader does not impose a personal agenda or value system on the group.

The leader follows the group's lead and is open to whatever emerges. The leader judges no one and is attentive to both 'good' and 'bad' people. It does not even matter whether a person is telling the truth or lying.

Being open and attentive is more effective than being judgmental. This is because people naturally tend to be good and truthful when they are being received in a good and truthful manner.

Perhaps the leader seems naïve and childlike in this uncritical openness to whatever emerges. But openness is simply more potent than any system of judgements ever devised.

The Sage's heart is not set in stone.

She is as sensitive to the people's feelings as to her own.

She says, "To people who are good, I am good.

And to people who are not good? I am good to them, too."

This is true goodness.

"People who are trustworthy, I trust.

And people who are not trustworthy, I also trust."

This is rea trust.

The Sage who leads harmoniously considers the mind of

her people as well as her own.

They look to her anxiously.

They are like her own children.

The
sage has no mind of her own.

She is at one with all of humanity.

Give
to those who are considered good.

Give to those who are considered bad.

This is true oneness.

Trust
those who are trustworthy.

Trust those who are not trustworthy.

This is also true oneness.

The
sage is peaceful and harmonious;

but to the world she seems indifferent.

The
world pays attention to her and listens to her

even though she resembles a child.

The wise man has no opinions,

so that he may understand the opinions of others.

To the Good, I am Good.

To the not Good, I am also Good.

Virtue is Good.

To the Honest, I am Honest.

To the Dishonest, I am also Honest.

Virtue is Honest.

The wise man is at peace with the World,

and from the World conceals his thoughts.

The wise man is everyone's child.

The Sage has no mind of his own;

He makes the mind of the people his mind.

Treat well those who are good;

Treat well those who are not good.

Thus everyone will become good.

Trust those who are sincere;

Trust those who are not sincere.

Thus everyone will become sincere.

When dealing with the world, the Sage blends his mind harmoniously with the mind of the people.

The people all watch him and listen to his words.

He accepts them all as his children.

The best ruler has no personal ideas

And what the people think is what he/she thinks.

He/She is good to people that are good.

He/She is also good to people that are not good.

It is the goodness typical of the Way server.

He/She trusts people that are trustworthy.

He/She also trusts people that are not trustworthy.

It is the trust typical of the Way server.

The best ruler gives each breath of his/her life to the world.

He/She holds to just a simple mind,

But is looked up to and listened to.

He/She takes the whole world to be his/her children.

The Wise Person is always a man without a mind - he takes the mind of the hundred clans as his mind.

Those who are good, I am good to them those who are not good, I am also good to them - Te is good.

Those who are honest, I am honest with them those who are not honest, I am also honest with them - Te is honest.

The Wise Person lives in the world all drawn in for the world's sake he keeps his mind muddled. The hundred clans all strain their eyes and ears toward him. The Wise Person treats them all as his children.

The wise has no selfish motives. He lives in caring about others.

To good people I do good, to the unkind I also wish good. This is the goodness of Tao.

With honest people I am honest, with dishonest I am honest also. This is the honesty of Tao.

The wise lives in calm in his country. Yet, in the same land other people live: both good and evil, honest and dishonest, reasonable and fool, selfish and selfless, those listening to Tao and those denying It.

The wise views people as his children.

The Wise Person has no Ego, he identify himself with the universe.

He is equally good with good or bad people.

His virtue is goodness.

He is equally honest with honest and dishonest people.

His virtue is honesty.

He
sees everybody equally, living simply and in harmony.

He is like a mother with her children.

In his heart he keeps the whole world.

The
Sage has no constant mind. He takes the minds of the common people to be his
own.

Those
who are good I treat as good. Those who are not good I also treat as good. Thereby
I gain goodness. The trustworthy I trust. The untrustworthy I also trust. Thereby
I gain trust.

The
Sage is closed off in respect to the world. For the sake of the world the Sage
muddles his mind. The common people all strain their eyes and ears. [Yet] the
Sage treats them all as little children.

The Sage has no constant heart [mind].

He takes the people's heart as his heart.

Good men, I treat well.

Bad men, I also treat well.

Therein I attain goodness.

Honest men, I trust.

Dishonest men, I also trust.

Therein I attain trust.

The Sage in his position in the world,

Yieldingly harmonizes the people's heart with simplicity.

The people all strain their ears and eyes.

And the Sage regards them all as infants.

Opening the Mind

Evolved Individuals have no fixed mind;

They make the mind of the People their mind.

To those who are good, I am good;

To those who are not good, I am also good.

Goodness is Power.

Of those who trust, I am trusting;

Of those who do not trust, I am also trusting.

Trust is Power.

The Evolved Individuals in the world

Attract the world and merge with its mind.

The People all focus their eyes and ears;

Evolved Individuals all act as infants.

The wolf dare not take on a bear alone. It is the pack, acting as one, that gets the job done. Nature tends to those who hunt, and those who are hunted. The sage lives in the world, among his people. He merges his mind with theirs.

The Wise Man's mind is free

But tuned to people's need:

"Alike
to be good and bad

I must be good,

For Virtue is goodness.

To honest folk

And those dishonest ones

Alike, I proffer faith,

For Virtue is faithful."

The
Wise Man, when abroad,

Impartial to the world,

Does not divide or judge.

But people everywhere

Mark well his ears and eyes;

For wise men hear and see

As little children do.

The sage has no fixed personal will,

He regards the people's will as his own.

I take the people's will, if it is good, as good.

I take the people's will, if it is not good, as good too.

Thus goodness is attained.

I believe the people's will, if it is believable.

I also believe the people's will, even if it is unbelievable.

Thus faith is attained.

The sage dwells under Heaven, harmoniously keeping all the people under Heaven in confusion,

(While all the people concentrate upon their own eyes and ears),

Thus the sage treats them all as ignorant infants without desires.

The sage has no constant heart/mind [changxin] but takes the heart/mind of the common folk as his heart/mind.

The good I regard as good;

those who are not good I also regard as good.

This is to transform goodness into virtue.

The trustworthy I trust;

those who are not trustworthy I also trust.

This is to transform trust into virtue.

The sage resides among all under Heaven with perfect equanimity and impartiality and for the sake of all under Heaven merges his heart/mind with theirs.

[The common folk all fix their ears and eyes on him,]

And the sage treats them all as his children.

1. The Sage constantly has no [set] mind;

2. He takes the mind of the common people as his mind.

3. Those who are good he regards as good;

4. Those who are not good he also regards as good.

5. [In this way] he attains goodness.

6. Those who are trustworthy he trusts;

7. And those who are not trustworthy he also trusts.

8. [In this way] he gets their trust.

9. As for the Sage's presence in the world—he is one with it.

10. And with the world he merges his mind.

11. The common people all fix their eyes and ears on him.

12. And the Sage treats them all as his children.

The Masters

don't make up their minds.

They turn their thoughts

to other people.

They are good
to good people,

and they're good to bad people.

This is real goodness.

They have faith
in the faithful,

and they have faith in the unfaithful.

This is real faith.

A Master throws
himself

into the world completely,

forgetting everything he's been told.

People pay attention to him

because he lives a life of child-like wonder.

The Power of Goodness

The wise have no mind-set.

They regard the people's minds as their own.

They are good to people who are good.

They are also good to people who are not good.

This is the power of goodness.

They are honest to those who are honest.

They are also honest to those who are dishonest.

This is the power of honesty.

The wise live in the world peacefully and harmoniously.

The people share a common heart,

and the wise treat them as their own children.

The Sage has no heart of his own His heart is beating in all.

Because his being breathes kindness He is equally kind to the good and the not-good.

Because his being breathes openheartedness he is equally open to the sincere and the insincere.

Devoted to the One He remains accessible to all As though they were his children Thereby winning their hearts.

People's Minds

Lao Tze says,

The sage doesn't have an invariable mind, he takes people's minds as his own mind.

Those who are good to him;

he treats well;

and those who are not good to him;

he treats well too;

thus all become good to each other.

To those who are sincere;

he is sincere;

and to those who are not sincere;

he is also sincere;

thus all become sincere.

The sage in the world pays scrupulous attention to everything.

However, he treats his living with indifference.

The people all offer their eyes and ears to help him, and he deals with them all as his children.

THE VIRTUE OF RECEPTIVITY

The
sage is not mindful for himself,

but is receptive to others' needs.

Knowing that virtue requires great faith,

he has that faith, and is good to all;

irrespective of others' deeds,

he treats them according to their needs.

He
has humility and is shy,

thus confusing other men.

They see him as they might a child,

and sometimes listen to his words.

The Master has no mind of her own.

She works with the mind of the people.

She is good to people who are good.

She is also good to people who aren't good.

This is true goodness.

She trusts people who are trustworthy.

She also trusts people who aren't trustworthy.

This is true trust.

The Master's mind is like space.

People don't understand her.

They look to her and wait.

She treats them like her own children.

The sage ruler had no prejudice of his own.

He made his mind to be based on the mind of the people.

If it was perfect, he liked it;

if it was not perfect, he also liked it:

then perfection was attained.

If it was true, he understood it;

if it was not true, he also understood it:

then truth was attained.

Indifferently, indifferently sage rulers were in the world.

Effortlessly, effortlessly they ruled the world.

The people turned their eyes and ears toward them.

Sage rulers treated all people like their own children.

The sage is always without his own mind.

He uses people's minds as his mind.

He is kind to those who are kind.

He is also kind to those who are not kind.

It is the kindness of Action itself.

He is trustworthy to those who are trustworthy.

He is also trustworthy to those who are not trustworthy.

It is the trust of Action itself.

In the world, the sage inhales.

For the world, the sage keeps the mind simple.

All people are fixated on the ears and eyes,

While the sage always smiles like a child.

XLIX

The
taoist has no opinions

He simply listens, and acts

He treats those who are good as worthy

He treats those who aren't good as worthy, too

And so he finds their goodness

He gives those who are honorable his trust

He gives those who are dishonorable his trust, too

And so he gains their trust

Sages Have No Fixed Mind

Sages have no fixed mind;

they make the minds of the people their mind:

they improve the good,

and also improve those who are not good;

that virtue is good.

They make sure of the true,

and they make sure of the untrue too;

that virtue is sure.

The relation of sages to the world

is one of concern:

they cloud their minds for the world;

all people pour into their ears and eyes,

and sages render them innocent.

Sages have no mind-set.

They take common people's concerns as theirs.

Good people, I treat them well.

Bad people, I also treat them well.

This is the virtue of kindness.

Good people, I trust them properly.

Bad people, I also trust them properly.

This is virtue of trust.

Sages in the world have no bias.

They mix their mind with that of common people.

This is why people follow them.

Sages treat people as if they were their own children.

The sage has no heart of his own, but takes the heart of the people as his own.

He is good to the good; he is also good to the not-good: for Virtue is good.

He is faithful to the faithful; he is also faithful to the unfaithful: for Virtue is faithful.

In the midst of the world, the sage recoils.

For the sake of the world he keeps his heart nebulous.

All the people strain their ears and eyes: he treats them as innocent children.

The sage has no pre-perceived notion,

sees people's virtue as virtue,

values the good virtue,

also values the bad virtue,

because, virtues are Virtue.

He has faith in people who are faithful.

He has faith in people who are not faithful.

Because Virtue is faithfulness.

The sage has an open mind to the world.

The minds of people,

the sage sees them as good as innocent children.

The True Person does not have an individual heart

but uses the heart of the people.

I
am kind to those who are kind.

I am also kind to those who are not kind.

Thus, there is an increase in kindness.

I keep faith with those who are in good faith.

I also keep faith with those WhO lack good faith.

Thus, there is an increase of good faith.

The
True Person is detached and humble

and to the world appears confusing.

The people all strain their eyes and ears, yet the True Person remains childlike.

The
follower of the way has

no constant heart or mind, no morality, no reason.

One uses the hearts and minds of others.

I am good to good people

I am also good to bad people

-- how else will they experience good?

I believe the truthful person

I also believe the liar and cheat

-- how else will they experience trust?

To
others the follower of the way

looks like a gullible coward.

For others the follower of the way

is simply simple.

Others
want to know the deeper meaning,

the real person, the true motive,

more photos, more sound bites.

The follower of the way

accepts the surface

and understands

the depths.

The wise man makes no judgements of his own. He has no rigid and plump ideas
alone. Maybe no certain, opinionated feelings.

He uses the heart of the people as his own inner side and heart. People's opinions
and feeling are then as his own.

He says:

Good ones I declare good; and I [often] treat those who are good with goodness,
as I approve of the good man.

I also treat those who are not so good with goodness.

I often approve of the [said] bad; he gets goodness.

So bad ones I also declare good. That's the goodness on how goodness can be
attained [by demagogy.]

The honest ones I believe; and [some] liars I also believe;

I am honest to those who are honest, and I am also honest to those who are not
[so] honest. By such means great honesty, the faith of virtue, can be attained
and the honest gets [closer to rueful] truthfulness.

In dealing with the world a wise man seems like one dazed with a felt fear,
and while governing his [little] empire he has no subjective viewpoint.

So a wise man lives in the world in peace, and his bright mind forms a sound
whole with that of his [dear] people.

Then they all lend their sense perceptions - eyes and ears - and he treats them
all - infants as well. But sometimes again a wise man, dealings with some world,
for the world's sake dulls his wits.

Where a hundred families all the time strain their eyes and ears, the wise man
all-sees a people are brought into a fold of one heart. Next the wise man regards
them as his own dear children.

At times the wise man sees and hears no more than an infant. [thats not much.]

The sage never has a mind of his own;

He considers the minds of the common people to be his mind.

Treat well those who are good,

Also treat well those who are not good;

thus is goodness attained.

Be sincere to those who are sincere,

Also be sincere to those who are insincere;

thus is sincerity attained.

The sage is self-effacing in his dealings with all under heaven, and bemuddles his mind for the sake of all under heaven.

The common people all rivet their eyes and ears upon him,

And the sage makes them all chuckle like children.

The wise man has no fixed opinions to call his own.

He accommodates himself to the minds of others.

I would return good for good; I would also return evil for evil.

Virtue is good.

I would meet trust with trust; I would likewise meet suspicion with confidence.

Virtue is trustful.

The wise man lives in the world with modest restraint, and his heart goes out in sympathy to all men.

THe people give him their confidence, and he regards them all as his children.

Genuine Affection

When your beloved delights you

you respond with affection—

a smile, a hug, a touch of the hand

gently on bare skin.

But when your beloved disappoints you,

can you still respond with affection?

Can you still open your arms, hold tenderly,

caress healingly, and talk lovingly?

This affection is genuine.

It does not depend

on the behavior of others.

It lies within you at all times.

Can you see each other at your very worst

and respond in love to what you see?

Can you see the lost and lonely child,

hiding behind the unpleasant behavior?

Can you hear the pleas for tenderness?

The sage has no fixed (personal) ideas. He regards the people's ideas as his own.

I treat those who are good with goodness. And I also treat those who are not good with goodness. Thus goodness is attained.

I am honest to those who are honest, And I am also honest to those who are not honest. Thus honesty is attained.

The sage, in the government of his empire, has no subjective
viewpoint. His mind forms a harmonious whole with that of his people.
The all lend their eyes and ears, And he treats them all as infants.

A sound man's
heart is not shut within itself

But is open to other people's hearts:

I find good people good,

And I find bad people good

If l am good enough;

I trust men of their word,

And I trust liars

If I am true enough;

I feel the heart-heats of others

Above my own

If I am enough of a father,

Enough of a son.

The great men did not have a fixed will;

they made the people's will their own.

When people are kind, I treat them kindly;

when people are unkind, I still treat them kindly;

this is called the kindness of DE.

When people are credible, I have faith in them;

when people are not credible, I still have faith in them;

this is called the faith of DE.

The great men were very cautious when governing their country;

They made the people simple and plain.

The people focused on their every movement, and the great men treated them like their children.

The sage does not have a set mind.

His mind is unconditioned, and

He regards the minds of all people as his own.

He is good to those who are good.

He is good to those who are not good.

For his virtue is goodness itself.

He is in integrity with those of integrity.

He is in integrity with those without integrity.

For his virtue is integrity itself.

The sage, to serve this world,

In compassion merges his mind with all minds.

People rivet their eyes and ears upon differences amongst them.

The sage, with childlike innocence, sees one humanity in all.

The best ruler has no personal ideas

And what the people think is what he/she thinks.

He/She is good to people that are good.

He/She is also good to people that are not good.

It is the goodness typical of the Way server.

He/She trusts people that are trustworthy.

He/She also trusts people that are not trustworthy.

It is the trust typical of the Way server.

The best ruler gives each breath of his/her life to the world.

He/She holds to just a simple mind,

But is looked up to and listened to.

He/She takes the whole world to be his/her children.

The master has no subjective conceptions,

His heart is open to the people.

He is kind to the kind.

He is also kind to the unkind.

This is the true practice of kindness.

To the honest he is trusting,

To the dishonest he is also trusting,

This is the true practice of trust.

The sage appears hesitant, and lives in harmonious peace in the world,

He considers his own mind as well as that of the people.

The people look to him lending their eyes and ears, and he treats them all as his children.

