===== Chapter 45 =====

Great completion seems incomplete.

Its use is not worn-out.

Great fullness seems empty.

Its use is not exhausted.

Great straightness seems bent.

Great skill seems clumsy.

Great argumentation seems slow of speech.

Stillness overcomes restlessness.

Coldness overcomes heat.

Clear and still, become for the world what is correct.

Great accomplishment seems unfinished But its use is continuous. Great fullness seems empty But in use is inexhaustible.

Great straightness seems bent, Great skill seems clumsy, Great eloquence seems mute.

Exertion overcomes cold. Calm overcomes heat. Pure calm is the norm under heaven.

Greatest perfection seems to be flawed

Yet its usefulness is never impaired.

Greatest abundance seems to be void

Yet its usefulness never wears out.

Greatest honesty seems to be dishonest.

Greatest ingenuity seems to be inept.

Greatest eloquence seems like stammering.

Being in motion overcomes the cold.

Keeping calm overcomes the heat.

Those who remain calm and pure

Can set the world right.

TRANQUILITY

Rare is that perfection which is not to some degree incomplete,

Yet its utility is not impaired.

Rare is the abundance which is not to some degree empty,

Its fullness, tho', is not exhausted.

Paradoxically:

Ultimate straightness often seems croaked.

Profound skillfulness and intelligence often appears clumsy and stupid.

Great eloquence often sounds as awkwardness and stammering.

Movement overcomes the cold, but calm subdues all heat.

The Sage, by his clarity, serenity and tranquility,

Becomes a model for All Things

under the heavens.

Great perfection is with imperfection.

Its use is not impaired.

Great fullness is with emptiness

Its usefulness is not exhausted.

Great truth is with inaccuracies.

Great skill is with limitations.

Great oratory is with stammering.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

The act of pure tranquility guides Heaven below (the sacred body).

THE OVERFLOWING OF THE

Despise thy masterpieces; thus renew the vigor of thy creation.

Deem thy fullness emptiness; thus shall thy fullness never be empty.

Let the straight appear crooked to thee, thy Craft clumsiness; thy Musick

discord.

Exercise
moderateth cold; stillness heat. To be pure and to keep

silence, is the True Law of all that are beneath Heaven.

Who thinks his great achievements poor Shall find his vigour long endure.Of greatest fullness, deemed a void, Exhaustion ne'er shall stem the tide.Do thou what's straight still crooked deem; Thy greatest art still stupidseem, And eloquence a stammering scream.

Constant action overcomes cold; being still overcomes heat. Purityand stillness give the correct law to all under heaven.

Perfection seems unfinished to this world

But it never perishes

Fullness is empty to the world

But it's inexhaustible

That which is correct, is incorrect to the world

Wisdom seems foolish to the world

Telling the truth a disgrace

Like movement chases away coldness

And rest cools down

Purity and calmness show one the right direction

What is most complete is still incomplete: Yet it is as complete as it can be. That which has achieved the most, still has the whole of its future yet to be achieved: Hence it will not stop achieving.

Make a thing as straight as possible; Yet it is still crooked or will become crooked. Acquire the greatest skill; And there will still be endless skill to be acquired. Develop the greatest power of expression; And there will be much that is unexpressed and inexpressible.

The same may be said about activity and passivity and cold and heat. Only he who fully accepts these alternations is the best guide for all to follow.

What is most perfect seems to have something missing;

Yet its use is unimpaired.

What is most full seems empty;

Yet its use will never fail.

What is most straight seems crooked;

The greatest skill seems like clumsiness,

The greatest eloquence like stuttering.

Movement overcomes cold;

But staying still overcomes heat.

So he by his limpid calm

Puts right everything under heaven.

Perfection appears imperfect

but has no flaw.

Fulfillment appears as emptiness

but has no limit.

Great truth is a paradox.

Great wisdom is self-evident.

Great eloquence is unpracticed.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Stillness and simplicity put all things right under heaven.

A great achievement (may) seem deficient

But its function is not impaired

A great fulfillment (may) seem empty

But its function is not diminished

Great straightforwardness (might) seem compromised

Great artfulness (might) seem clumsy

Great eloquence (might) seem to stammer

Restlessness overcomes cold

Stillness overcomes heat

Clarity & stillness act as measures to the world

Silence

Great accomplishment seems incomplete,

Yet its usefulness is never exhausted.

Great fullness seems to be empty,

Yet its usefulness is never used up.

Great straightness seems to be twisted;

Great skill seems to be clumsy;

Great eloquence seems to stammer;

Great surplus seems to be lacking.

Activity overcomes cold.

Tranquility overcomes heat.

If you are quiet and tranquil

You can become the ruler of the world.

The greatest perfection seems imperfect, yet its usefulness is endless. The greatest fullness seems empty, yet its usefulness is inexhaustible. Great straightness seems flexible.

Great skill looks clumsy. Great eloquence sounds awkward.

Movement triumphs over cold. Stillness triumphs over heat. Clarity and tranquility set the whole world in order.

The greatest accomplishment seems lacking,

Yet has all it needs to endure.

The most teeming abundance appears shallow,

But its depth and breadth cannot be measured.

Lasting justice seems inconsequential;

The purest art looks simple and meager;

True eloquence sounds awkward and hollow.

Life stirs when it's cold,

And is tranquilly still amid heat.

Moving outward from the center,

In the dance of the primordial stillness,

The Cosmic Whole continually replenishes

The natural order of the Harmonic Essence.

In the previous poem, Lao Tzu brought the importance of recognizing limits to our attention. In this poem, he reveals life as lived beyond the obsession with appearances. The poem opens with two stanzas that contain the cautionary expressions found throughout the Tao Te Ching: things are not always what they seem, and we must see past appearances in order to further and protect our true being. Then there is an apparently paradoxical couplet, that may seem out of place: "Life stirs when it's cold/And is tranquilly still amid heat." What is Lao Tzu telling us here? There is always the obvious: sure, some creatures are busy in cold weather, but others go off and hibernate. But Lao Tzu is talking about "inner temperatures" rather than seasonal variations.

For people, success and safety in social interactions are especially crucial, and these are linked to the issue of inner temperature. When we can feel that the egos of others around us are hot and active, it is best to be still and inwardly withdrawn, so as not to arouse still more heat from them, and of course to avoid being burned. When we feel a lowering of ego-temperature in a social environment, such as when ego has been "frozen" by an external shock, or when the heat of ego has been cooled by a breeze of common interest that awakens the true selves of all within the situation, then we can discover the potential for action, relationship, and involvement. Thus, recognizing both potential and limitation within social encounters is about feeling the inner temperature, and about seeing past appearances. Indeed, these amount to the same inner process: reacting to life from the center of one's being; retreating from the heat of ego (in both oneself and others), and warmly engaging the cool lightness of being that is encountered in those who are lacking in display, aggrandizement, forced complexity and profundity, or pretence.

The most perfect seems imperfect,

but it endures with constancy.

The greatest fullness seems empty,

but it cannot be exhausted.

The
most straight seems twisted.

The most skillful seems clumsy.

The most eloquent seems awkward.

Movement
overcomes cold,

stillness overcomes heat.

The serene and passive are guides for all.

The greatest attainment is as though incomplete, but its utility remains unimpaired.

The greatest fullness is as a void; but its utility is inexhaustible.

The greatest uprightness is as crookedness; the greatest cleverness as clumsiness; the greatest eloquence as reticence.

Motion overcomes cold; stillness conquers heat.

Purity and stillness are the world's standards.

The greatest perfection seems imperfect;

Yet its use will last without decay.

The greatest fullness seems empty;

Yet its use cannot be exhausted.

The greatest straightness seems crooked.

The greatest dexterity seems awkward;

The greatest eloquence seems stammering.

Activity overcomes cold;

Quietness overcomes heat.

Only through purity and quietude can the world be ruled.

Extremes and Reversals

Great completion is like deficiency.

Its use does not 'corrupt'.

Great filling is like being poured.

Its use does not exhaust.

Great straightforwardness is like being bent.

Great skill is like clumsiness.

Great distinction-debating is like shouting.

Exercise conquers a chill.

Rest conquers a fever.

'Clear' and 'quiet' are deemed as correct for the social world.

When accomplishment reaches its utmost,

It is as if nothing is accomplished.

Its application is never exhausted.

When fullness reaches its utmost,

It is as if it is still vacant.

Its application leads to limitlessness.

Thus the perfectly straight is as if it were bent.

The most skilled is as if it were stupid.

The greatest ability of debate is as if it were speechless.

Hence, quiescence surpasses movement,

Coldness surpasses heat,

Tranquillity sets the example for the world.

Great achievement seems imperfect, yet its usefulness is not diminished.

Great fullness seems empty, yet it is inexhaustible.

Great frankness seems to succumb.

Great discussion seems silent.

Activity overcomes coldness.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Purity and stillness are the ideal for the world.

Great perfection seems imperfect -

Its function is unfailing;

Great fullness seems empty -

Its function is inexhaustible.

Great straightness seems bent;

Great eloquence seems tongue-tied;

Great adroitness seems clumsy;

Great affluence seems deficient.

Restlessness overcomes cold;

Stillness overcomes heat.

Emptiness and stillness

May serve as the norm of the empire.

The greatest perfection looks flawed,

And even so, it never perishes.

The greatest fullness looks empty,

And even so, it will never run out.

The straightest road looks crooked.

The greatest vigor looks like laziness,

The greatest eloquence looks like stammering.

Action overcomes cold,

Tranquillity overcomes heat.

Only through purity and tranquillity of spirit

Can order be imposed on the world.

Great perfection seems chipped,

Yet use will not wear it out;

Great fullness seems empty,

Yet use will not drain it;

Great straightness seems bent;

Great skill seems awkward;

Great eloquence seems tongue-tied.

Restlessness
overcomes cold;

Stillness overcomes heat.

Limpid
and still,

One can be a leader in the empire.

Greatest Virtue

"Greatest perfection imperfect will be,

But its work ne'er waneth.

Greatest fulness is vacuity,

Its work unexhausted remaineth."

"Straightest lines resemble curves;

Greatest skill like a tyro serves;

Greatest eloquence stammers and swerves."

Motion conquers cold. Quietude conquers heat. Purity and clearness are the world's standard.

Although things appear imperfect, herein lies their perfection. Fullness appears empty, herein lies its fullness. That which is straight appears bent. The wise appear foolish. The talented appear unskilled. That which is still appears to move. By not moving, the master can move into any situation.

Great Perfection appears flawed; its use is endless.

Great Fullness appears less; its use is limitless.

Great Straightness appears warped,

Great Dexteriousness appears handicapped,

Great Eloquence appears reticent.

Serenity wins over rashness; coolness wins over heatedness.

Serenity governs the world.

Great perfection seems flawed, but its usefulness never falters.

Great fullness seems empty, but its usefulness never runs dry.

Great rectitude seems bent low,

great skill seems clumsy,

great eloquence seems quiet.

Bustling around may overcome cold, but tranquility overcomes heat.

Master lucid tranquility and you'll govern all beneath heaven.

A perfect tool appears defective, but, it shows no impairment in operation.

A great abundance appears empty, but, it is inexhaustible in consumption.

A truly straight edge appears crooked,

A great cleverness appears clumsy,

A great orator appears tight tongued.

Vigorous exercise overcomes cold;

Calm quietude overcomes heat.

Clear heads and calm minds can right the world.

Great
perfection looks incomplete

Used it lacks impairment

Great fullness looks like it needs more

Used it lacks exhaustion.

Great
straightness looks bent

Great skill looks awkward

Great eloquence looks like it stutters.

Restlessness
conquers the cold

Stillness conquers the heated

Clarity and stillness act on the world, ordering it.

Accomplished, beneath an imperfect exterior. Giving, (of himself) without becoming worn out. Filled up, without appearing to be so, And pouring out without being emptied. Very straight, beneath a bent air;

most able, behind an awkward appearance; highly perspicacious, with an embarrassed exterior. This is the Sage.

Movement beats the cold (warms one up), rest overcomes heat (refreshes). The withdrawn life of the Sage rectifies all the empire (strikes at the root of its depravation.

Great perfection seems flawed

Its function is without failure

Great fullness seems empty

Its function is without exhaustion

Great straightness seems bent

Great skill seems inept

Great eloquence seems inarticulate

Movement overcomes cold

Stillness overcomes heat

Clear quietness is the standard of the world

That which is absolutely perfect and complete seems flawed, just as the Tao can seem imperfect or incomplete to human beings, despite being the essence of great perfection. The utilization, or functioning, of the great perfection of Tao is

That which is absolutely filled seems empty

That which is perfectly straight seems bent, or crooked.

Pure silence and clear stillness should be the standard, or model, for the world to set everything right.

, yet functions without a hitch.

Great fullness seems empty, yet functions without exhaustion.

Great straightness seems crooked,

Great skill seems clumsy,

Great eloquence seems stammering.

Excitement overcomes cold, stillness overcomes heat.

Clarity and stillness set everything right.

The greatest attainment is as though incomplete; but its utility remains unimpaired.

The greatest fullness is as a void; but its utility is inexhaustible.

The greatest uprightness is as crookedness; the greatest cleverness as clumsiness; the greatest eloquence as reticence.

Motion overcomes cold; stillness conquers heat.

Purity and stillness are the world's standards.

THE VIRTUE (TEH) OF GREATNESS

Extreme perfection seems imperfect, its function is not exhausted. Extreme fullness appears empty, its function is not exercised.

Extreme straightness appears crooked; great skill, clumsy; great eloquence, stammering. Motion conquers cold, quietude conquers heat. Not greatness but purity and clearness are the world's standard.

Great perfection appears lacking (ch'üeh),

Its use is unending.

Great fullness appears empty,

Its use is inexhaustible.

Great straightness appears bent,

Great ingenuity (ch'iao) appears crude,

Great eloquence (pien) appears inarticulate.

When agitation (tsao) wins (sheng), the cold arrives,

When tranquillity (ching) wins (sheng), the hot arrives.

Clear and tranquil the world is in the right mode (cheng).

The most perfect seems imperfect, but it endures with constancy. The greatest fullness seems empty, but it cannot be exhausted. The most straight seems twisted; the most skilled seems clumsy; the most eloquent seems awkward. Movement overcomes coldness; stillness overcomes heat. The serene and passive are guides for all.

The perfect seems flawed, but its usefulness is unlimited.

Full seems empty, but it is inexhaustible.

Straight seems bent.

Intelligent seems stupid.

Eloquent seems tongue–tied.

Motion defeats the cold.

Stillness defeats the heat.

The Tao–Master remains calm as a guide for all things.

Forty-five

Great accomplishment seems imperfect,

Yet it does not outlive its usefulness.

Great fullness seems empty,

Yet cannot be exhausted.

Great straightness seems twisted.

Great intelligence seems stupid.

Great eloquence seems awkward.

Movement
overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Stillness and tranquillity set things in order in the universe.

The complete perfection seems flawed,

But its use can never be exhausted;

The fullest seems empty,

But its use can never come to an end;

The straightest seems bent;

The most skillful seems clumsy;

The most eloquent seems tongue-tied.

Movement overcomes cold;

Quiet overcomes heat.

So inaction and quiet help one

Become a leader of the world.

Great accomplishment looks incomplete;

Use will not wear it out.

Great fullness looks empty;

Use will not exhaust it.

Great straightness looks crooked;

Great skill looks clumsy;

Great eloquence sounds stuttering;

"Being in motion overcomes cold;

Being still overcomes heat."

Be clear and still, and you will be the lord of all under Heaven.

The greatest accomplishment appears imperfect, but its utility is limitless.

Immense fullness appears inadequate, yet its use is inexhaustible.

Though as straight as an arrow, it appears crooked.

Polished agility appears awkwardly clumsy.

Great eloquence appears haltingly hesitant.

Tranquillity prevails upon rashness.

Coldness overcomes heat.

The sage maintains quietude and practises non-action.

He sets an example for everyone to follow.

Grand Virtue

Hung Teh

Great perfection seems imperfect;

Its utility will never deteriorate.

Great fullness seems hollow;

Its utility will be inexhaustible.

The most straight appears to be bent;

The most skillful appears to be awkward;

The most eloquent appears to be stammering.

Hastiness subdues cold;

Quiescence subdues heat.

Purity and quiescence are the norms of the universe.

The greatest perfection seems inadequate,

But it is unfailing in its usefulness;

What is brimful seems empty,

But it is inexhaustible in its usefulness.

The completely straight seems crooked, the greatest skill seems awkward,

The greatest eloquence seems like stammering.

Activity overcomes cold,

But stillness overcomes heat.

Only by purity and stillness will the world be governed.

What is most perfect seems imperfect,

But using it doesn't use it up.

What is most full seems empty,

But using it doesn't wear it down.

Great straightness seems crooked;

Great skill seems clumsy;

Great eloquence seems hesitant.

Movement conquers cold,

But stillness conquers heat.

Clearness and serenity

Are beneath-heaven's norm.

The great perfection seems imperfect, yet its usefulness is unfailing.

The great fullness appears to be void, yet its usefulness is boundless.

The great accomplishment seems unfinished.

The ultimate straightness appears crooked.

Profound skillfulness appears clumsy.

Fluent eloquence seems mute.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Maintain clarity and purity,

and be a model of deep virtue for all people.

XLV.

A
Flood of Virtues

Who
can behold his great work incomplete

Will
keep his usefulness without decay,

He
who regards his fullness as a void

In
usefulness can exercise each day.

His
greatest straightness seems like crookedness,

His
greatest skill seems like stupidity,

His
greatest eloquence of voice and tongue

The
stammering seems of imbecility.

By
constant motion cold is overcome,

But
heat by being still is conquered best,

In
purity and clearness is the type

Of
all beneath the sky made manifest.

Esteem lightly your greatest accomplishment, your patience will not fail.

Reckon your great fulness to be emptiness, your strength will not become exhausted.

Count your rectitude as foolishness,

Know your cleverness to be stupidity,

Recognize your eloquence to be stammering words,

And you will find that

As movement overcomes cold, and as stillness overcomes heat, even sol, he who knows the true secret of tranquillity

Will become a pattern for all mankind.

The greatest perfection

is never completed,

So its use

never runs out.

The greatest fullness

has always room for more,

So its use

goes on forever.

The greatest straightness

is curved.

The greatest skill

is looks effortless.

The greatest speaking

is slow.

Moving around

overcomes cold,

Calm

overcomes heat.

The peaceful and

calm

Is the Normal

of the World.

Treat the most flawless (vase) as cracked, and it will not wear out in use.

Treat the fullest (vase) as empty, and it will not run dry in use.

Treat the straightest as crooked, the cleverest as clumsy, the most eloquent as stammering.

Stamping may overcome cold, but stillness overcomes heat.

Purity and stillness are what rectifies All-under-heaven.

Who thinks his great achievements poor

Shall find his vigour long endure.

Of greatest fulness, deemed a void,

Exhaustion ne'er shall stem the tide.

Do thou what's straight still crooked deem;

Thy greatest art still stupid seem,

And eloquence a stammering scream.

Constant
action overcomes cold; being still overcomes heat. Purity

and stillness give the correct law to all under heaven.

Great perfection appears 'defective,'
but it's usefulness is not diminished.

Great fullness appears 'empty,'
but it's usefulness is not impaired.

Great
straightness seems crooked.
Great skill seems clumsy.
Great attainment
seems bashful.
Bustling-about
vanquishes cold;
standing still vanquishes heat.
Pure
and still, one can straighten-out the Universe.

Wholeness
seems like imperfection

Yet its usefulness is sure

Fullness seems quite empty

But it is certain to endure

True
straightness can seem twisted

True wisdom does not seem to know

Great eloquence seems halting

Great darkness seems to be aglow

Can
you see that emptiness

Contains all oppositions?

Like hot and cold and fast and slow?

All differences and all conditions?

THE greatest perfection seems imperfect,

And yet its use is inexhaustible.

The greatest fullness seems empty,

And yet its use is endless.

The greatest straightness looks like crookedness.

The greatest skill appears clumsy.

The greatest eloquence sounds like stammering.

Restlessness overcomes cold,

But calm overcomes heat.

The peaceful and serene

Is the Norm of the World.

The masters greatest perfection seems imperfect, yet when used it is inexhaustible,

The masters' greatest fullness appears empty, yet it can continue giving without end.

The masters' greatest straightness appears crooked, yet it is upright and righteous.

The masters' greatest skill appears rustic and clumsy, yet it works with unparalleled accuracy.

The masters' greatest eloquence appears as tongue-tied stammering, yet he teaches without words.

The masters' movement conquers cold,

The masters' stillness conquers heat,

The stillness and tranquility of the master conquers the world.

The greatest accomplishments seem imperfect,

yet their usefulness is not diminished.

The greatest fullness seems empty,

yet it will be inexhaustible.

The
greatest straightness seems crooked.

The most valued skill seems like clumsiness.

The greatest speech seems full of stammers.

Movement
overcomes the cold,

and stillness overcomes the heat.

That which is pure and still is the universal ideal.

The best work often seems idiotically simple to group members who are unaccustomed to this sort of leadership. Yet a great deal happens.

Perhaps it looks as if the leader is only sitting there and has no idea of what to do. But it is just this lack of needless intervention that permits the group to grow and be fertile.

Perhaps some disappointed group members expected an expert who would expound freely. But what this leader says is so obvious, it often sounds simple-minded. Even this leader's honesty seems strangely perplexing.

Appearing foolish does not matter. When you are cold, flap your arms about to get warm. But when you are overheated, you keep still. That is common sense.

The leader's stillness overcomes the group's agitation. The leader's consciousness is the primary tool of this work.

True perfection seems flawed

Yet its usefulness is never exhausted.

True fulfillment seems empty

Yet its usefulness is infinite.

True straightness seems crooked,

Great skil appears easy,

Great eloquence sounds awkward.

Cold overcomes heat.

Tranquility conquers agitation.

Purity and stillness is the universa ideal.

Great
accomplishments seem incomplete

yet their legacy is long lived.

Great
abundance seems insignificant

but it is inexhaustible.

A
beam of light is just a wave.

Great
skill seems easy.

Great eloquence seems boring.

Motion
generates heat.

Stillness manifests the cold.

Peace
and harmony are the nature of Infinity.

Great Achievement appears deficient, but serves without fail.

Great Abundance seems modest, but provides without limit.

Great honesty appears devious.

Great intelligence seems dumb.

Great discussions are low-keyed.

Activity overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Peace and Quiet is proper under Heaven.

Great accomplishment seems inadequate,

But its usefulness will last forever.

Great fullness seems empty,

But using it cannot exhaust it.

Great straightness seems crooked.

Great skill seems awkward.

Great surplus seems deficient.

Great eloquence seems to stammer.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Being calm and tranquil one can become ruler of the world.

The perfect seems defective, but can be used limitlessly.

The truly full seems empty, but can be used endlessly.

The straight seems crooked.

The truly artful seems clumsy.

The most eloquent seems tongue-tied.

Peace outdoes turmoil, and cold heat.

Peace is therefore the best policy.

The greatest perfection will seem lacking in something but its usefulness never ends. The greatest solidity will seem Empty but its usefulness is inexhaustible. The greatest uprightness will seem compromised

the greatest ability will seem clumsy the greatest eloquence will seem tongue-tied.

"Agitation overcomes cold Stillness overcomes heat. "Purity and Stillness are the Norm of the World.

People may confuse the Greatest Perfection — with insanity, great volume — with void, great curvature — with straightness, great humor — with foolishness, a great speaker — with the unable to speak.

Intense movement overcomes cold; stillness overcomes heat.

Calm and harmony just ensure correct understanding of everything that happens in the world.

The way of perfection has no end no matter how high it is,

Still something can be added.

Its use is thus better and better.

Infinity
no matter how big is, still something can be added.

Thus its usefulness is greater and greater.

No
matter how straight a thing can be, still can be straightened.

The art of doing anything, can still be improved.

The one who has a good speech, he can do better.

What is moving can be improved.

Only that is not moving is complete in itself.

That is the base, the model and leads everything.

The
greatest accomplishment seems to have imperfections, yet there is no impairment
in its function. The greatest fullness is like vacuity, yet in use it is never
exhausted. The greatest straightness is like crookedness. The greatest knack
is like clumsiness. The greatest eloquence is like stumbling speech. Agitation
overcomes the cold, tranquility overcomes the heat. The pure and tranquil are
the correct ones in the world.

Great completion appears to be imperfect,

Yet its usefulness is never exhausted.

Great fullness appears to be empty,

Yet its usefulness is unlimited.

Great straightness seems bent.

Great craftiness seems clumsy.

Great eloquence seems to be stuttering.

Hastiness overcomes the cold.

Serenity overcomes the hot.

Calmness and serenity become the rectitude of the world.

Using Emptiness

If the greatest achievement is incomplete,

Then its usefulness is unimpaired.

If the greatest fullness is empty,

Then its usefulness is inexhaustible.

The greatest directness is flexible.

The greatest skillfulness is awkward.

The greatest eloquence is hesitant.

Agitation triumphs over the cold.

Stillness triumphs over the heated.

Clarity and stillness bring order to the world.

The true wisdom is found within a child. The oldest tree bends to the wind. The perfect art is an un-carved block. Nature has done her work. Let the Dao speak through it.

Most perfect, yet it seems

Imperfect, incomplete:

Its use is not impaired.

Filled up, and yet it seems

Poured out, an empty void:

It never will run dry.

The
straightest, yet it seems

To deviate, to bend;

The highest skill and yet

It looks like clumsiness.

The utmost eloquence,

It sounds like stammering.

As
movement overcomes

The cold, and stillness, heat,

The Wise Man, pure and still,

Will rectify the world.

What is most perfect seems to be incomplete,

But its utility cannot be impaired.

What is most full seems to be empty,

But its utility cannot be exhausted.

The most straight seems to be crooked,

The greatest skill seems to be clumsy,

The greatest eloquence seems to stammer.

Rapid walking overcomes cold,

Being quiet overcomes heat.

By remaining quiet and tranquil, one will be the chief under Heaven.

Great completion seems incomplete, but its functioning is never exhausted.

Great fullness seems empty, but its functioning is limitless.

Great straightness seems crooked.

Great skill seems clumsy.

Great eloquence seems inarticulate.

Although the heat of activity conquers cold, quietude conquers heat, so pure quietude is the right way to govern all under Heaven.

1. Great completion seems incomplete;

2. Yet its usefulness is never exhausted.

3. Great fullness seems to be empty;

4. Yet its usefulness is never used up.

5. Great straightness seems to be bent.

6. Great skill seems to be clumsy.

7. Great surplus seems to stammer.

8. Activity overcomes cold;

9. Tranquility overcomes heat.

10. If you're quiet and tranquil you can become the ruler of the world.

The greatest
achievements

may look like mistakes,

but you will always be able

to build upon them.

The fullest
reserves may seem empty,

but you will always be able

to draw upon them.

The straightest
line looks crooked.

The most skilled people

come off as clumsy.

The most eloquent people

are usually silent.

When it's cold,

you can move around to stay warm.

When it's hot,

you should keep still and stay cool.

But whatever the weather,

if you stay calm,

the world will sort itself out around you.

Skill Seems Awkward

The greatest perfection seems incomplete,

but its utility is never impaired.

The greatest fullness seems empty,

but its use cannot be exhausted.

What is most direct seems devious.

The greatest skill seems awkward.

The greatest eloquence seems like stuttering.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

The serene and calm are guides for all.

Right perfection seems imperfect yet abundance flows from it.

Highest fulfillment resembles emptiness yet remaining inexhaustible.

Highest straightness seems devious greatest wisdom sounds foolish and highest eloquence like stuttering ...

As motion conquers cold calmness conquers heat.

Serene action is the gauge of the Sage.

Purity And Stillness

Lao Tze says,

The greatest accomplishment seems to have blemishes, but when applied, it is long enduring.

The greatest fullness seems to be vacant, but when applied, it is inexhaustible.

The greatest straightness seems crooked.

The greatest craftiness seems stupid.

The greatest eloquence seems dumb.

Restlessness overcomes the cold;

being still overcomes the heat.

Purity and stillness give correct law to all in the world.

CHANGES

In
retrospect, even those accomplishments

which seemed perfect when accomplished,

may seem imperfect and ill formed,

but this does not mean that such accomplishments

have outlived their usefulness.

That
which once seemed full,

may later empty seem,

yet still be unexhausted.

That which once seemed straight

may seem twisted when seen once more;

intelligence can seem stupid,

and eloquence seem awkward;

movement may overcome the cold,

and stillness, heat,

but stillness in movement

is the way of the Tao.

True perfection seems imperfect,

yet it is perfectly itself.

True fullness seems empty,

yet it is fully present.

True straightness seems crooked.

True wisdom seems foolish.

True art seems artless.

The Master allows things to happen.

She shapes events as they come.

She steps out of the way

and lets the Tao speak for itself.

The superior perfection may seem imperfect.

Because of its vast capacity, its function is never exhausted.

Because of its vast capacity, its function is never limited.

The superior fulness may seem empty.

The superior straightness may look like crookedness.

The superior skill may appear clumsy.

The superior eloquence may sound like stammering.

Inaction overcomes restlessness.

Inaction overcomes impulsiveness.

Quiescence overcomes irritation.

He kept purity and tranquility to be the model of the world.

Grand perfection seems lacking, yet its use is never exhausted.

Grand fullness seems empty, yet its use never comes to an end.

Grand straightforwardness seems bent.

Grand skill seems clumsy.

Grand surplus seems deficient.

Activity overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Peace and tranquility can be the measure of the world.

XLV

What's
done right seems unfinished, but always works

What's filled right seems empty, but there's always enough

The perfectly straight seems warped

The most skilled looks artless

The greatest eloquence sounds plain

What
exists in abundance always seems unremarkable

We move to warm ourselves and rest to cool ourselves

But never think about the natural warmth that lies within us

Always flow back to the center, find what strengths lie there

And things will go right with you

Great Completeness Seems Incomplete

Great completeness seems incomplete;

its use is never exhausted.

Great fullness seems empty;

its use is never ended.

Great directness seems restrained,

great skill seems inept,

great eloquence seems inarticulate.

Movement overcomes cold,

stillness overcomes heat.

Clear stillness is right for the world.

Great achievement appears imperfect, Its application is limitless.

Complete fullness appears empty, It cannot be used up.

Perfect straightness appears bent.

Adept skills appear awkward.

Great eloquence appears dull.

The calm wins out over the impatient.

The cold wins out over the heat.

Serenity makes the world orderly.

The greatest perfection seems imperfect; yet its use is inexhaustible.

The greatest fullness seems empty; yet its use is endless.

The greatest straightness seems bent.

The greatest skill appears clumsy.

The greatest eloquence seems stammering.

Active overcomes cold.

Calmness overcomes heat.

Tranquillity is the norm of the world.

Great accomplishment seems imperfect,

yet it does not outlive its usefulness.

Great fullness seems empty,

yet it cannot be exhausted.

Great straightness seems bent.

Great intelligence seems ignorant.

Great eloquence seems awkward.

Movement overcomes cold.

Stillness overcomes heat.

Peaceful set things in order in the universe.

Great accomplishment seems incomplete,

yet its use is not impaired.

Great filllness seems empty,

yet it will never be drained.

Great
straightness looks crooked.

Great skill appears clumsy.

Great eloquence sounds like stammering.

Movement
overcomes cold,

stillness overcomes heat.

The
calm and quiet set right

everything under heaven.

Perfection
seems to be missing something

but like an empty cup

it is perfect.

The fullest seems to be empty

but like the ocean

it is always there.

The perfectly straight line looks crooked

the most intelligent seem stupid

the best speech seems like stuttering.

Activity
overcomes cold

but stillness overcomes heat.

Being still,

one puts everything

in its proper place.

What's most perfect [ambivalence] seems to be incomplete; [its] highest perfection
is never impaired. The perfect seems to have something missing; [so have something
missing]. Highest perfection is like imperfection, but its use is never impaired,
nor its utility [at times].

What's most full [opening] seems empty; its use will never fail.

The greatest abundance seems meagre indeed, but its use will never fail.

What's most straight seems devious, maybe crooked.

The
greatest skills seems to be [rustic,] clumsy. The greatest cleverness appears
like stupidity, [(Demon skill seems like clumsiness. Apt skill seems clumsy,
true cleverness seems clumsy.]

The greatest [harlequin] eloquence seems to stutter or seems like stuttering.

Hasty movement overcomes cold.

Keeping still can overcome heat. Tranquillity and staying still can overcome
heat.

By being greatly still you'll next be fit to rule the world. Who is calm and
quiet becomes the universe deceit. By his limpid calm he all the time puts right
everything [as universal deceit].

Great perfection appears defective,

but its usefulness is not diminished.

Great fullness appears empty,

but its usefulness is not impaired.

Great straightness seems crooked,

Great cleverness seems clumsy,

Great triumph seems awkward.

Bustling about vanquishes cold,

Standing still vanquishes heat.

Pure and still, one can put things right everywhere under heaven.

He who sees that his highest attainments are always incomplete may go on working indefinitely.

He who sees his greatest possessions to be inadequate may go on acquiring forever.

His highest rectitude is but crookedness.

His greatest wisdom is but foolishness.

His sweetest eloquence is but stammering.

Action overcomes cold; inaction overcomes heat.

With virtue and quietness one may conquer the world.

Perfection

Perfection cannot be attained,

but it can be noticed.

If you pay full attention

to what seems flawed and ordinary

you will notice the perfection

hiding beneath appearances.

If you pay full attention to each other

you will notice how perfectly

you are each becoming who you really are.

By seeing the perfection in what is

you allow the creation

of what is not.

What is, is.

Each of you are what you are.

That's the way it is.

If you can learn to take delight

in what seems flawed and wrong in each other,

you create the atmosphere that enables

growth and change.

Sounds impossible?

Try it.

What is most perfect seems to be incomplete; But its utility is
unimpaired. What is most full seems to be empty; But its usefulness is
inexhaustible. What is most straight seems to be crooked.

The greatest skill seems to be clumsy. The greatest eloquence seems to stutter.

Hasty movement overcomes cold, (But) tranquility overcomes heat. By
being greatly tranquil, One is qualified to be the ruler of the world.

A man's work,
however finished it seem,

Continues as long as he live;

A man, however perfect he seem,

Is needed as long as he live:

As long as truth appears falsity,

The seer a fool,

The prophet a dumb lout,

If you want to keep warm keep stirring about,

Keep still if you want to keep cool,

And in all the world one day no doubt

Your way shall be the rule.

The greatest accomplishment seems incomplete, but when you use it, it never has trouble.

The completely filled object seems empty, but when you use it, it never runs out.

The straightest looks crooked;

The cleverest looks clumsy;

The best debater sounds awkward.

Tranquility overcomes commotion, coolness overcomes hotness.

Coolness and tranquility are the real essence of the world.

Great perfection appears imperfect,

Yet there is no end to its process of perfecting.

Great fullness appears empty,

Yet there is no limit to its process of fulfilling.

Great uprightness appears bent,

Great mastery seems clumsy,

Great eloquence sounds awkward,

Yet they keep growing without limitations.

Movement overcomes stagnation.

Stillness overcomes discordance.

Movement and stillness in balance

Set the world in evolutionary order.

The perfect seems defective, but can be used limitlessly.

The truly full seems empty, but can be used endlessly.

The straight seems crooked.

The truly artful seems clumsy.

The most eloquent seems tongue-tied.

Peace outdoes turmoil, and cold heat.

Peace is therefore the best policy.

The masters greatest perfection seems imperfect, yet when used it is inexhaustible,

The masters' greatest fullness appears empty, yet it can continue giving without end.

The masters' greatest straightness appears crooked, yet it is upright and righteous.

The masters' greatest skill appears rustic and clumsy, yet it works with unparalleled accuracy.

The masters' greatest eloquence appears as tongue-tied stammering, yet he teaches without words.

The masters' movement conquers cold,

The masters' stillness conquers heat,

The stillness and tranquility of the master conquers the world.

