===== Chapter 41 =====

High scholars hear of the Tao attentively and practice it.

Middling scholars hear of the Tao—

They seem to keep it [sometimes], seem to lose it [at other times].

Low scholars hear of the Tao—

They greatly deride it.

Not deriding is not sufficient to be the Tao.

This is the reason that [among the] established sayings there are these:

"The clear Tao seems obscure."

"Making progress in the Tao seems like going backwards."

"The smooth Tao seems flawed."

"Superior virtue seems like a hollow."

"Great purity seems like dishonor."

"Extensive virtue seems insufficient."

"Building virtue seems like whiling away without purpose."

"True qualities seem to change."

"A great region is without corners."

"A great instrument is completed toward the end."

"Great sound is rarely made known."

"Great shape is without form."

The Tao is hidden.

Nameless.

But only the Tao is good at pardoning and completing.

The great scholar hearing the Tao Tries to practice it. The middling scholar hearing the Tao, Sometimes has it, sometimes not.

The lesser scholar hearing the Tao Has a good laugh. Without that laughter It wouldn't be Tao.

Therefore these sayings: The bright road seems dark, The road forward sees to retreat, The level road seems rough.

Great Te seems hollow. Great purity seems sullied. Pervasive Te sees
deficient. Established Te seems furtive. Simple truths seem to change.
The great square has no corners. The great vessel is finished late. The
great sound is scarcely voiced. The great image has no form.

Tao hides, no name. Yet Tao alone gets things done.

When the best students hear of Tao

They follow it with all their might.

When average students hear of Tao

Sometimes they heed it sometimes they don't.

When the worst students hear of Tao

They laugh at it heartily.

Were it not laughed at,

Tao would not be what it is.

Thus it is said:

A path that is bright seems to be dim.

A path going forward seems to go back.

A path that is smooth seems to be uneven.

The highest virtue seems to be hollow.

The purest white seems to be sullied.

The amplest virtue seems insufficient.

The firmest virtue seems unsteady.

The genuine virtue seems to be fickle.

The greatest realm is without boundaries.

The finest talent matures late.

Harmonious music makes no noise.

The perfect form has no substance.

Tao is hidden and nameless.

Yet it is Tao that sustains all things

And brings them to completion.

HOW IT MAY SEEM

A wise person, hearing of the Tao,

Lets it become a central focus of life.

A mediocre person, hearing of the Tao,

Keeps to it or not, as the occasion, may suggest.

An inferior person, hearing of the Tao, Laughs aloud at it.

Truly, being inferior, had he failed to laugh at it -

It most certainly would not be worthy to be called the Tao.

Hence it is said:

- The bright way may seem dimly lit.

- The way ahead may seem like a retreat.

- The straight way may seem to be wavy and crooked.

- The highest virtue may seem to be devoid of substance.

- The pure may seem to be tarnished.

- The greatest Te may seem inadequate.

- The sturdiest Te may appear to be flimsy.

- The natural way may appear contaminated.

- The great square may appear with rounded corners.

- The greatest talent may be slow to mature.

- The most elegant music may be that which is faint.

- The greatest images may be without shape.

The Tao, hidden and nameless,

Nourishing All Things,

Brings them to fulfillment.

The master who acts from above strains to listen to the Tao, and becomes exhausted.

The master who acts from the middle hears the Tao very faintly, and then loses it.

The master who acts from below hears the Tao and laughs greatly.

Those who are unable to laugh will not have enough of a reason to practice the Tao.

Thus we can say:

The luminous Tao seems dark.

The advancing Tao seems to retreat.

The smooth Tao appears flawed.

The highest action of the soul seems empty.

Great purity appears degraded.

Abundant action of the soul appears to not be enough.

Stable action of the soul appears to be unsteady.

Simple truth seems fickle.

It is the great square that has no corners.

It is the great vessel that is not complete.

It is the great music that has no sound.

It is the great elephant that has no form.

The Tao is hidden without a name.

Yet for these exact reasons the Tao is good and completes.

THE IDENTITY OF THE DIFFERENTIAL

The best students, learning of the Tao, set to work earnestly to practice

the Way. Mediocre students now cherish it, now let it go.

The worst students mock at it. Were it not thus mocked, it were unworthy

to be Tao.

Thus
spake the makers of Saws: the Tao at its brightest is obscure. Who

advanceth in that Way, retireth. Its smooth Way is rough. Its summit is

a valley. Its beauty is ugliness. Its wealth is poverty. Its virtue,

vice. Its stability is change. Its form is without form. Its fullness

is vacancy. Its utterance is silence. Its reality is illusion.

Nameless
and imperceptible is the Tao; but it informeth and perfecteth

all things.

Scholars of the highest class, when they hear about the Tao, earnestlycarry it into practice. Scholars of the middle class, when they have heardabout it, seem now to keep it and now to lose it. Scholars of the lowestclass, when they have heard about it, laugh greatly at it. If it were not(thus) laughed at, it would not be fit to be the Tao. Therefore the sentencemakers have thus expressed themselves:-

'The Tao, when brightest seen, seems light to lack: Who progress init makes, seems drawing back; Its even way is like a rugged track. Itshighest virtue from the vale doth rise; Its greatest beauty seems to offendthe eyes; And he has most whose lot the least supplies. Its firmest virtueseems but poor and low; Its solid truth seems change to undergo; Its largestsquare doth yet no corner show; A vessel great, it is the slowest made;Loud is its sound, but never word it said; A semblance great, the shadowof a shade.'

The tao is hidden, and has no name; but it is the Tao which is skilfulat imparting (to all things what they need) and making them complete.

When the most sincere hear about the road to self-knowledge,

They will devote themselves to bringing it into practice

When the fairly sincere hear about the road to self-knowledge

They will only get out of it what suits their purposes

When the hardened hear about the road to self-knowledge

They will roar with laughter

If they didn't roar, it would not be true

Therefore there are some aphorisms to it:

The road to light appears to be dark

Going forward sometimes feels like going back

The way to the simple road is a hard way to take

But also:

The greatest personality turns out to be vain

The purest white turns out to be grey

The most righteous proves to be unfair

Kindness seems but a thin layer

With the truth one can go in all directions

Like a square circle

Like an inexhaustible barrel

Like singing without words

Like a sculpture with no shadow

In that way the road is hidden and not captured in words

Only the road to self-knowledge has a beginning and an end

When the intelligent man hears about Nature's alternating ways, he seeks to embody it within himself. The mediocre man sometimes accepts it and sometimes does not.

Unintelligent men scoff at it. Yet this very scoffing at intelligence itself exemplifies Nature's way of alternation.

This is the reason for the old sayings: Nature's brightest day fades into night. Nature's most luxuriant growth ages toward decay. Nature's smoothest plain erodes itself away into rough terrain.

Nature's most harmonious adjustment generates conflict. Nature's most beautiful objects grow dim and ugly. Nature's greatest prize soon becomes despised. Nature's strongest power eventually weakens. Nature's soundest supports gradually rot away. Nature's squarest corners soon become rounded. Nature's grandest structures sooner or later are destroyed. Nature's loudest sounds are finally silenced.

Hence, Nature, although beyond comprehension and description, Knows how to bring about, alternately, all initiating and completing.

When the man of highest capacities hears Tao

He does his best to put it into practice.

When the man of middling capacity hears Tao

He is in two minds about it.

When the man of low capacity hears Tao

He laughs loudly at it.

If he did not laugh, it would not be worth the name of Tao.

Therefore the proverb has it:

"The way out into the light often looks dark,

The way that goes ahead often looks as if it went back."

The way that is least hilly often looks as if it went up and down,

The "power" that is really loftiest looks like an abyss,

What is sheerest white looks blurred.

The "power" that is most sufficing looks inadequate,

The "power" that stands firmest looks flimsy.

What is in its natural, pure state looks faded;

The largest square has no corners,

The greatest vessel takes the longest to finish,

Great music has the faintest notes,

The Great From is without shape.

For Tao is hidden and nameless.

Yet Tao alone supports all things and brings them to fulfillment.

When the wise student hears of Tao

he practices diligently.

When the average student hears of Tao

he practices off and on.

When the foolish student hears of Tao

he laughs out loud.

If the foolish do not laugh, it is not Tao.

Thus it is said:

The path of light is through darkness.

The road ahead leads back.

The easy way is most difficult.

The highest fulfillment is emptiness.

True purity seems sullied.

True abundance seems bereft.

True power seems weak.

True substance seems hollow.

The greatest region has no boundaries.

The best tools are fashioned slowly.

The highest sounds are hard to hear.

The perfect form has no shape.

Tao is unseen, undefined.

Yet Tao alone nourishes

and brings all things to fulfillment.

Superior students, hearing of the way,

Are diligent and practice it

Average students, hearing of the way,

Sometimes attend & sometimes forget

Inferior students, hearing of the way,

Laugh greatly about it

Without the laughter there would be no grounds

to regard this as the way

And so the established proverbs hold that:

Brightness, to the way, is as good as darkness

Advance, to the way, is as good as retreat

Evenness, to the way, is as good as roughness

The summit of character is as good as a valley

The greatest whiteness is as good as soiled

Abundant character seems inadequate

Established character seems furtive

The evident truth seems spurious

The greatest square has no corner

The greatest capacity is last to be realized

The greatest note is the rarest sound

The greatest image has no form

The way is hidden & nameless

(But) because way is good at acceptance

(it is) also fulfilling

Travellers

When the highest type of men hear of Way

With diligence they are able to practice it;

When average men hear of Tao

Some things they retain and others they lose.

When the lowest type of men hear of Way

They laugh out loud at it.

If they did not laugh at it,

It could not be regarded as the Way.

Therefore, there is a set saying about this that goes:

The bright Way appears to be dark;

The Way that goes forward appears to retreat;

The smooth Way appears to be uneven;

The highest Virtue is empty like a valley;

The purest white appears to be soiled;

Vast Virtue appears to be insufficient;

Firm Virtue appears to be thin and weak;

The simplest reality appears to change.

The Great Square has no corners;

The Great Vessel takes long to complete;

The Great Tone makes little sound;

The Great Image has no shape.

The Way is great but has no name.

Only the Way is good at beginning things

and also good to bring everything to fulfillment.

When a wise person hears Tao, he practices it diligently. When an average person hears Tao, he practices it sometimes, and just as often ignores it.

When an inferior person hears Tao, he roars with laughter. If he didn't laugh, it wouldn't be Tao.

Thus the age old sayings: The way to illumination appears dark. The way that advances appears to retreat. The way that is easy appears to be hard. The highest virtue appears empty. The purest goodness appears soiled. The most profound creativity appears fallow.

The strongest power appears weak. The most genuine appears unreal. The greatest space has no corners. The greatest talent matures slowly. The greatest voice can't be heard. The greatest image can't be seen.

Tao is hidden and has no name. Tao alone nourishes and fulfills all things.

The sincere student hears of Tao,

Then sees if he can steadfastly follow it.

A casual student hears of Tao

And follows it sporadically-

Trusting here, and skeptical there.

When the self-centered hear of Tao

Their laughter fills the air:

How could it be Tao

If it didn't make them laugh?

Therefore is it said:

The one with the lantern shines the least.

The one making progress seems behind.

The easiest path seems tortuous.

Natural strength appears weak and hollow.

And the greatest virtue seems too small.

Beneficence seems to lack foundation.

The most enduring truths are mutable.

Perfect squares have no sharp corners.

The most useful tool seems inefficient.

The loveliest music is hardly heard.

The Subliminal Form cannot be touched.

The One is silent and concealed-

This indeed is its practical virtue:

Thus it freely gives its help

To all who would experience

Their original perfection.

This is a wonderful and playful meditation on seeing beyond the realm of appearances. We can approach the Tao and its teaching function, the Sage, from many different perspectives, three of which Lao Tzu mentions in this poem. The "sincere student," it must be noted, is not said to be devout, reverent, or even especially serious (to judge by the poem's overall tone). He sees whether he can "steadfastly follow it," without any mention of devotion or sacrifice to an ideal: he just puts in his effort and asks for help, thus dispersing fear and awe in his approach.

Many of us have been through a similar experience to that of the "casual student," in which old belief systems (or certain precious shards thereof) are inwardly hoarded even as we begin to perceive how insanely they obstruct growth. Thus, we experience both trust and skepticism in our learning—sometimes simultaneously.

Finally, there are those who encounter the Tao and its teachings with ego mechanisms firmly in place, whose derisive laughter fills the air. Perhaps you have found yourself (either directly or implicitly) referred to as a "new age freak" or a "tree-hugging lunatic". People who don't know what true self-development is about will inevitably make fun of those who attempt it. But as Lao Tzu would remind us, "how could it be the Tao if it didn't make them laugh?"

The list of curious epigrams making up the second half of the poem is another example of the seemingly odd deportment of one following the Cosmic Way. The lantern light, which is also mentioned in Chapter 58, is a metaphorical image for understanding that is not garish or overbearing: it faintly glows, but never shines.

This points up another natural beauty of Lao Tzu's paradoxical approach: because it reaches into the bypaths and recesses of consciousness, the Cosmic Way is actually more efficient, since it is more thorough. This is why Lao Tzu can later say, in Chapter 53, that "the Cosmic Way is straight and easy." Similarly, natural strength may seem weak to the superficial view, because it departs from displays of power and persuasion; natural virtue may seem unimpressive to a cursory perspective, because it retreats from ideas of stiff morality and egocentric shows of compassion (what is called "idiot compassion" in the writings of Chogyam Trungpa).

In fact, there always seems to be something lacking in the action, speech, and behavior of one involved in following the Sage, because what is lacking is ego! Ego, and its linear rigidities and angularities of belief, certainty, and power.

Nestled among these observations of the poet is another and related insight, that "the most enduring truths are mutable." How can truth be enduring and mutable at the same time? Because, Lao Tzu points out, that is its nature: truth is a personal matter, an organic, growing form of living consciousness that never reaches a point of fixed certainty. Anything that is hard, fixed, and sealed in certainty is already dead and inert—this is an observation that Lao Tzu repeats throughout the book, as in, for example, Chapter 76. Fixed insight loses vision; absolute and unchanging truth is no longer true, because it is no longer alive.

This is exactly why it is such an advantage (a "practical virtue") that the Tao, and its teaching consciousness, the Sage, are "silent and concealed." Its silence gives it mutability—the capacity to take a natural shape within each individual personality; its concealment gives it an amorphous flexibility, which again makes it the unique and private inner experience appropriate to each person who approaches it in sincere steadfastness.

Whenever the truly wise hear of Tao

they strive earnestly to use it.

Whenever the mediocre hear of Tao

they are aware, yet unaware of it.

Whenever the stupid hear of Tao they laugh aloud at it.

If it were not laughed at it would not be Tao.

Therefore
it is said of Tao:

enlightenment seems dullness;

progress seems regression;

the true path seems misleading.

The
highest character seems recessive like a valley;

the purest virtue seems tarnished;

the most adequate seems somehow insufficient;

the most firm seems frail;

the most fundamental seems changeable.

Great
space has no corners;

great ability takes time to mature;

great music is soft and mellow;

great form is shapeless, contourless.

Tao
is hidden; it is nameless;

yet it stimulates; it brings fulfillment.

The true student hears of the Tao; he is diligent and practices it.

The average student hear of it; sometimes he appears to be attentive, then again he is inattentive.

The half hearted student hears of it; he loudly derides it. If it did not provoke ridicule it would not be worthy of the name – Tao.

Again there are those whose only care is phraseology.

The brilliancy of the Tao is an obscurity; the advance of the Tao is a retreat; the equality of the Tao is an inequality; the higher energy is as cosmic space; the greatest purity is as uncleanness; the widest virtue is as if insufficient; established virtue is as if furtive; the truest essence is as imperfection; the most perfect square

is cornerless; the largest vessel is last completed; the loudest sound has fewest tones; the grandest conception is formless.

The Tao is concealed and nameless, yet it is the Tao alone which excels in imparting and completing.

When the superiour scholar is told of Tao,

He works hard to practise it.

When the middling scholar is told of Tao,

It seems that sometimes he keeps it and sometimes he loses it.

When the inferiour scholar is told of Tao,

He laughs aloud at it.

If it were not laughed at, it would not be sufficient to be Tao.

Therefore the proverb says:

'Tao in enlightenment seems obscure;

Tao in progress seems regressive;

The highest virtue seems like a valley;

The purest white seems discoloured;

The most magnificent virtue seems insufficient;

The solidest virtue seems frail;

The simplest nature seems changable;

The greatest square has no angles;

The largest vessel is never complete;

The loudest sound can never be heard;

The biggest form cannot be visualised.

Tao, while hidden, is nameless.'

Yet it is Tao alone that is good at imparting and completing.

Playing with Reversal

The 'superior' scholar hears a guide.

He gets all serious and follows it.

The 'medium' scholar hears a guide.

It's like it endures; it's like it disappears!

The 'lower' scholar hears a guide.

He hilariously laughs at it.

If he did not laugh, it would not be up to being deemed a guide.

Hence, as the saying goes--

A discerning guide is like a murky one.

An guide to advancing is like one to retreating.

A guide to leveling is like one to roughing up.

'Superior' virtuosity is like a valley.

The greatest 'white' is like filthy.

'Expansive' virtuosity is like 'insufficient.'

'Creating' virtuosity is like 'stealing.'

'Solid authenticity' is like 'sliminess.'

The greatest square has no corners.

The greatest artifact is never finished.

The greatest note rarely sounds.

The greatest sign lacks shape.

Guides hide the lack of names.

In general only guides are good at adopting and also completing.

When a man of superior talent listens to Tao, he earnestly applies it.

When an ordinary man listens to Tao, he seems to believe it and yet not to believe it.

When the worst man listens to Tao, he greatly ridicules it.

If he did not ridicule it, it would not be Tao.

Therefore, in Ch'ien-yen we have:

Understand Tao as if you do not understand it;

Enter into Tao as if you are coming out of it;

Move smoothly with Tao as if you are having difficulties.

The highest attainment is as if it is no attainment.

All-embracing attainment is as if it is lacking attainment.

Rigorous attainment is as if it is indolent loafing.

Real essence is as if it is empty.

The great white is as if it is black.

The great square is without corners.

Great capacity is successful in its later days.

Great music is without sound.

The great image is without form.

Tao is concealed and without name.

Nevertheless, Tao furnishes all things and fulfills them.

A first-rate scholar hears the Tao and practises it conscientiously.

A second-rate scholar hears the Tao and follows it just at that moment.

A poor scholar hears the Tao and laughs out loud.

If the poor scholar does not laugh, it cannot be the Tao.

That is why it is said:

One who knows the Tao clearly seems ignorant.

One who improves himself according to the Tao seems backward.

One who moves with the Tao is equal to the Tao.

The highest virtue feels empty, like the valley.

The purest whiteness feels tainted.

The brightest virtue never seems adequate.

He who is virtuous feels like a thief.

The purest nature seems polluted.

The truest square has no corners.

The greatest abilities mature slowly.

The greatest tone has no sound.

The greatest shape has no form.

The Tao hides within the nameless.

Only the Tao is able to change and to bring everything to completion.

When the superior scholar hears the Tao,

He does his utmost to practice it;

When the middling scholar hears the Tao,

It seems existent, seems non-existent;

When the inferior scholar hears the Tao,

He bursts out laughing.

If he did not burst out laughing,

It would not deserve to be the Tao.

Hence, "Established Sayings" has it:

"The clear Tao seems obscure;

The advancing Tao seems receding;

The even Tao seems rugged;

Supreme virtue is like a valley;

Great white seems black;

Abundant virtue seems deficient;

Robust virtue seems flabby;

Honest truth seems capricious;

The great square has no corners;

The great vessel is imperfect;

The great voice has no sound;

The celestial image has no form."

The Tao is invisible and nameless;

The Tao alone

Begins well and ends well.

Non-existence can penetrate the hardest of all.

Therefore I know that there is usefulness to non-action.

Learning without words, usefulness without action,

Only a few in the world have achieved this.

When the best student hears about the way

He practises it assiduously;

When the average student hears about the way

It seems to him there one moment and gone the next;

When the worst student hears about the way

He laughs out loud.

If he did not laugh

It would be unworthy of being the way.

Hence
the Chien yen has it:

The way that is bright seems dull;

The way that is forward seems to lead backward;

The way that is even seems rough.

The highest virtue is like the valley;

The sheerest whiteness seems sullied;

Ample virtue seems defective;

Vigorous virtue seems indolent;

Plain virtue seems soiled;

The great square has no corners.

The great vessel takes long to complete;

The great note is rarefied in sound;

The great image has no shape.

The
way conceals itself in being nameless.

It is the way alone that excels in bestowing and in accomplishing.

Sameness in Difference

When a superior scholar hears of Reason he endeavors to practise it.

When an average scholar hears of Reason he will sometimes keep it and sometimes lose it.

When an inferior scholar hears of Reason he will greatly ridicule it. Were it not thus ridiculed, it would as Reason be insufficient.

Therefore the poet says:

"The Reason--enlightened seem dark and black,

The Reason--advanced seem going back,

The Reason--straight-levelled seem rugged and slack.

"The high in virtue resemble a vale,

The purely white in shame must quail,

The staunchest virtue seems to fail.

"The solidest virtue seems not alert,

The purest chastity seems pervert,

The greatest square will rightness desert.

"The largest vessel is not yet complete,

The loudest sound is not speech replete,

The greatest form has no shape concrete."

Reason so long as it remains latent is unnamable. Yet Reason alone is good for imparting and completing.

One, who upon hearing of the Tao is immediately transformed, is superior. One, who upon hearing of the Tao, half doubts it, is average. One, who upon hearing of the Tao laughs at it, is inferior. If fools didn't scoff at it, it wouldn't be great. Thus it is said: Light seems to arise out of darkness. To go forward appears to be going in reverse. To be simple seems complicated. Real compassion seems harsh. Real strength seems weak. The unchanged seems to change. Great love seems indifferent. The master seems like a fool. The Tao is nothing, but through it everything is.

Hearing Direction,

a scholar with high intelligence follows it with diligence;

a scholar with average intelligence greets it with mixed seriousness and doubt;

a scholar with low intelligence ridicules it.

Direction will not be Direction without being ridiculed.

It is said:

A bright Direction appears unilluminating;

An advancing Direction appears retreating;

A straight-forward Direction appears uninviting;

Highest virtue appears as valley impoverished;

Purest white appears blemished;

Broadest virtue appears diminished;

Strong virtue appears slack;

Fine quality appears flawed;

The supreme square has no corners;

The supreme vessel is cast last;

The supreme sound is inaudible;

The supreme image is formless.

Direction is unrevealed and anonymous.

Through Direction, help is given and work is completed.

When the lofty hear of Way

they devote themselves.

When the common hear of Way

they wonder if it's real or not.

And when the lowly hear of Way

they laugh out loud.

Without that laughter, it wouldn't be Way.

Hence the abiding proverbs:

Luminous Way seems dark.

Advancing Way seems retreating.

Formless Way seems manifold.

High Integrity seems low-lying.

Great whiteness seems tarnished.

Abounding Integrity seems lacking.

Abiding Integrity seems missing.

True essence seems protean.

The great square has no corners,

and the great implement completes nothing.

The great voice sounds faint,

and the great image has no shape.

Way remains hidden and nameless,

but it alone nourishes and brings to completion.

When Tao is heard by a man of high intellect,

He practices it with diligence.

When Tao is heard by a man of average intellect,

He follows it half-heartedly.

When Tao is heard by a man of no intellect,

He will have a hearty laugh at it.

And it would not be Tao without being laughed at.

Thus there is the accepted saying:

The bright way appears dark; the progressive way, regressive; and the smooth way, uneven.

The high virtue appears hollow; the purest white, tinted; the far-reaching virtue, inadequate; the firm virtue,

lax; and the real quality, wanting.

The greatest square appears cornerless; the great talent, the last to be recognized; the great music, devoid of

appealing sound; and the great image, formless.

Tao is hidden and nameless,

Yet only Tao is capable of helping all to succeed in life.

Better
knights hear of tao

Dutifully, yet they are practicing it

Average knights hear of tao

They look aware, they look unaware

Lesser knights hear of tao

They have great laughing.

Without
laughing, there's not enough of the action of tao happening.

So
long-established words are present.

Luminous tao looks dark

Advancing tao looks like it is falling back

Level tao looks uneven

Better ideal looks like a valley

Great whiteness looks spotted

Extensive ideal looks like it lacks enough

Established ideal looks unsteady

Durable ideal looks changeable

Great squares are absent of corners

Great tools are slowly perfected

Great music sounds faint

Great form lacks shape.

Tao
is hidden, absent from name

In the end,

Only tao values lending at interest and moreover perfects.

When a well-read person of high caliber hears about the return to the Principle, he applies himself to it with zeal. A person of medium caliber applies himself to it indecisively.

An inferior person ridicules it. That such a person should ridicule it, is a mark of the truth of this doctrine. The fact that they do not understand it, shows its transcendence.

They say in the proverb: Those who have understood the Principle are as if blind; those who tend towards it are as if disoriented; those who have reached it seem like common people. This is because great virtue hollows itself like a valley, the great light voluntarily dims itself, vast virtue seems defective, solid virtue seems incapable.

Therefore the Sage hides his qualities beneath a somewhat repulsive exterior. He who goes by these appearances will be quite misled. Like a square so big that its corners are invisible, like an enormous vase that is never finished, like a great meaning hidden in a feeble sound, like a great shape that cannot be grasped;

the Sage resembles the Principle. - Now the Principle is latent and has no name, but through its gentle communication, everything is produced. It is the same, in proportion, for the Sage.

Higher people hear of the Tao

They diligently practice it

Average people hear of the Tao

They sometimes keep it and sometimes lose it

Lower people hear of the Tao

They laugh loudly at it

If they do not laugh, it would not be the Tao

Therefore a proverb has the following:

The clear Tao appears unclear

The advancing Tao appears to retreat

The smooth Tao appears uneven

High virtue appears like a valley

Great integrity appears like disgrace

Encompassing virtue appears insufficient

Building virtue appears inactive

True substance appears inconstant

The great square has no corners

The great vessel is late in completion

The great music is imperceptible in sound

The great image has no form

The Tao is hidden and nameless

Yet it is only the Tao

That excels in giving and completing everything

But "not laughing" in itself is not sufficient to be called the Tao,

and therefore it is said:

The sparkling Tao seems dark

Advancing in the Tao seems like regression.

Settling into the Tao seems rough.

True virtue is like a valley.

The immaculate seems humble.

Extensive virtue seems insufficient.

Established virtue seems deceptive.

The face of reality seems to change.

The great square has no corners.

Great ability takes a long time to perfect.

Great sound is hard to hear.

The great form has no shape.

The Tao is hidden and nameless.

This is exactly why the Tao is good at developing and perfecting.

The true student hears of the Tao; h is diligent and practices it.

The average student hears of it; sometimes he appears to be attentive, then again he is inattentive.

The half hearted student hears of it; he loudly derides it. If it did not provoke ridicule it would not be worthy the name-Tao.

Again there are those whose only care is phraseology.

The brilliancy of the Tao is as obscurity; the advance of the Tao is as a retreat; the equality of the Tao is as inequality; the higher energy is as cosmic space; the greatest purity is as uncleanness; the widest virtue is as if insufficient; established virtue is as if furtive; the truest essence is as imperfection; the most perfect square is cornerless; the largest vessel is last completed; the loudest sound has fewest tones; the grandest conception is formless.

The Tao is concealed and nameless, yet it is the Tao alone which excels in imparting and completing.

THE UNREALITY OF APPEARANCE

The superior scholar when he considers Tao earnestly practices it; an average scholar listening to Tao sometimes follows it and sometimes loses it; an inferior scholar listening to Tao ridicules it. Were it not thus ridiculed it could not be regarded as Tao.

Therefore the writer says: Those who are most illumined by Tao are the most obscure. Those advanced in Tao are most retiring. Those best guided by Tao are the least prepossessing.

The high in virtue (teh) resemble a lowly valley; the whitest are most likely to be put to shame; the broadest in virtue resemble the inefficient. The most firmly established in virtue resemble the remiss. The simplest chastity resembles the fickle, the greatest square has no corner, the largest vessel is never filled. The greatest sound is void of speech, the greatest form has no shape. Tao is obscure and without name, and yet it is precisely this Tao that alone can give and complete.

When a superior person (shan shih) hears Tao,

He diligently practices it.

When a middling person (chung shih) hears Tao,

He hears it, he doesn't hear it.

When the inferior person (hsia shih) hears Tao, he roars.

If Tao were not laughed at,

It would not be Tao.

Therefore, established sayings (chien yen) have it this way:

"The illuminating (ming) Tao appears (jo) dark,

The advancing Tao appears retreating,

The level Tao appears knotty (lei).

High (shan) te appears like a valley,

Great whiteness (po) appears spotted (ju),

Expansive te appears insufficient,

Well-established te appears weak,

The genuine in substance appears hollow.

Great (ta) square has no corners,

Great vessel (ch'i) is late in completion,

Great voice (yin) has hardly (hsi) any sound,

Great image is formless,

Tao is hidden and without name."

Yet it is Tao alone,

That is good in lending help and fulfilling all.

Whenever the truly wise hear of Tao they strive earnestly to use it. Whenever the mediocre hear of Tao they are aware, yet unaware of it. Whenever the stupid hear of Tao they laugh aloud at it. If it were not laughed at it would not be Tao.

Therefore it is said of Tao: enlightenment seems dullness; progress seems regression; the true path seems misleading.

The highest character seems recessive like a valley; the purest virtue seems tarnished; the most adequate seems somehow insufficient; the most firm seems frail; the most fundamental seems changeable.

Great space has no corners; great ability takes time to mature; great music is soft and mellow; great form is shapeless, contourless.

Tao is hidden; it is nameless; yet it stimulates; it brings fulfillment.

When a thoughtful man hears of the Tao, he tries to follow it.

When an average man hears of the Tao,

he wonders about it, but then tends to forget it.

When a fool hears of the Tao, he makes fun of it.

If someone didn't make fun of it, it wouldn't be the Tao.

Therefore, when seeking the Tao,

light seems dark,

advancing feels like retreating,

the simple appears difficult,

power is like weakness,

purity seems tarnished,

true virtue seems deficient and unsteady,

and the clear seems obscure.

The true square has no corners.

The true vessel never sails.

The true sound is hard to hear.

The true form has no shape.

The Tao is hidden, beyond definition; but it alone fulfills.

Forty-one

The wise student hears of the Tao and practices it diligently.

The average student hears of the Tao and gives it thought now and again.

The foolish student hears of the Tao and laughs aloud.

If there were no laughter, the Tao would not be what it is.

Hence it is said:

The bright path seems dim;

Going forward seems like retreat;

The easy way seems hard;

The highest Virtue seems empty;

Great purity seems sullied;

A wealth of Virtue seems inadequate;

The strength of Virtue seems frail;

Real Virtue seems unreal;

The perfect square has no corners;

Great talents ripen late;

The highest notes are hard to hear;

The greatest form has no shape;

The Tao is hidden and without name.

The Tao alone nourishes and brings everything to fulfillment.

Hearing the Tao, the best scholar assiduously practices it;

The average scholar half believes and half doubts it;

The worst scholar bursts into laughter about it.

If the worst scholar does not laugh about it,

The Tao is not worthy of being called the Tao.

That is why the ancients say:

The bright Tao seems dark;

The advancing Tao seems to be retreating;

The even Tao seems rough;

The great virtue resembles the valley;

The pure whiteness seems black;

The infinite virtue seems lacking;

The virile virtue seems idle;

The pure simplicity seems turbid;

The great square has no corners;

Of the utensils the most precious takes the longest time to be finished;

The great sound seems soundless;

The great image seems formless.

The Tao always conceals itself without a name,

But it is the Tao alone that helps and completes everything.

When the highest type of man hears Tao,

He practices it diligently.

When the middle type hears Tao,

He half believes and half disbelieves it.

When the lowest type hears Tao,

He laughs out loud.

If he didn't,

It couldn't possibly be considered Tao.

Therefore the Chien yen has it:

"The bright Tao looks dark;

The forward-moving Tao seems retreating;

The level Tao seems bumpy;

The highest Te is like a valley;

Perfect white looks soiled;

The broad Te seems insufficient;

The firm Te seems precarious;

The pure Te seems discolored;

The great square has no corners;

The great vessel takes long to complete;

The great sound is inaudible;

The great form is shapeless."

Tao is hidden and nameless.

Truly, Tao alone supports [all things] and brings them to completion.

When a consummate scholar learns about Dao,

He studies it diligently and puts it into practice.

When a mediocre scholar hears about Dao,

He becomes totally perplexed.

When a lowly scholar hears about Dao,

He instantaneously bursts into laughter.

If it is not sneered at,

It cannot have been the real Dao.

Therefore, there was an ancient saying:

A person who knows about Dao appears to be dull.

A person who is advanced in Dao appears to be backward.

A person who travels smoothly along the path of Dao appears to be on a bumpy ride.

A person with excellent virtue appears to be quite shallow.

A person with immaculate virtue appears tarnished.

A person with great virtue appears to be inadequate.

A person with substantial virtue seems to be flimsy.

A person with genuine virtue appears to be shifty.

The greatest space has no corners.

A prodigal talent takes time to actualise.

The greatest sound is nature's sound of silence.

Dao has no form.

Dao is subtle, obscure, and indescribable.

Only Dao will give generously and help others to accomplish.

Similarity and Difference

T'ung I

The first-rate scholar, on hearing Tao,

Is diligent in practicing it;

The second-rate scholar, on hearing Tao,

Wavers between faith and forgetfulness;

The third-rate scholar, on hearing Tao,

Bursts into loud laughter.

If not laughed at, it would not be Tao!

Hence the following proverbs -

He who understands Tao seems confounded by it.

He who advances toward Tao seems retreating from it.

He who follows plain Tao seems treading on rugged ground.

Superior virtue appears to be hollow.

Perfect purity appears to be tainted.

Vast virtue appears to be inadequate.

Solid virtue appears to be infirm.

Genuine substance appears to be spurious.

Vast space is devoid of corners.

Great talent is late in maturing.

A high note can hardly be heard.

The Great Form has no sign.

Tao is hidden and has no name;

Yet only Tao excels in contributing to achievement.

When a man of highest wisdom is told about the Tao;

He is eager to follow it.

When a man of middling wisdom is told about the Tao,

At times he follows it, at times he loses touch with it.

When a man of no wisdom is told about the Tao,

He laughs aloud;

If he did not laugh at it, it could not rightly be named the Tao.

For as a maekr of proverbs has truly siad:

"Enlightenment in the Tao seems like darkness;

Progress in the Tao seems like regress";

Evenness in the Tao seems like roughness;

The highest virtue seems like the emptiness of a valley.

The purest white seems murky;

The most exalted virtue seems inadequate;

The strongest virtue seems unstable;

The most steadfast nature seems variable.

For "the greatest square of all has no angles;

The largest vessels are late brought to perfection;

The highest note is scarcely heard;

The greatest image has no shape."

The Tao, in its secrecy, is nameless;

Yet it is the Tao which is behine everyhting and brings all things to completion.

When a superior man hears about Tao,

He goes after it diligently.

When an average man hears about Tao,

He both gets it and loses it.

When an inferior man hears about Tao,

He laughs loudly at it.

If he did not laugh,

It would not be Tao.

There is an old saying:

The bright way looks dark;

The forward way looks backward;

The smooth way looks rough;

High virtue looks low;

Great whiteness looks defiled.

Broad virtue looks deficient;

Solid virtue looks illicit;

Simple virtue looks decayed.

Great space has no corners.

Great talent ripens late.

Great music is out of key.

The great symbol is out of shape.

Tao is without name and hidden.

Hence Tao helps and completes.

When people of the highest awareness hear the subtle Way of the universe,

they cultivate themselves diligently in order to live in accord with it.

When mediocre people hear the subtle Way of the universe,

they are unimpressed.

When people who are low hear the subtle Way of the universe,

they break into loud laughter.

If it were not laughed at,

it would not be the subtle Way of the universe.

Thus there is a traditional saying that he who understands the subtle Way of the universe seems dull of comprehension.

He who approaches the subtle Way of the universe seems to move away from it.

He who moves on the smooth path of the universe seems to go up and down as if traveling a rough road.

The deeply virtuous are like an empty, receptive valley.

The innocent appear to be sullied.

The abundant appear to be deficient.

The perfect appear to be defective.

The honest appear to be corrupt.

Hence, great space has no corners.

Great talent ripens late.

Great eloquence is silent.

Great form is shapeless.

The subtle essence of the universe is hidden and indefinable, yet its benefit is always subtly bestowed.

XLI.

Sameness
and Difference

Scholars
of the highest type, who hear about the Tao,

Practise
it with diligence unceasing;

Scholars
of the middle sort, when they have heard of it,

May
keep it, or may find its hold releasing;

But scholars
of the lowest class, who hear about the Tao,

Laugh
with laughter constantly increasing;

Were
they not to la4lgh at it, the lowest class of men

Its
fitness as the Tao would soon be ceasing.

And
so the sentence-makers have spoken of it so,

The
Tao when at its brightest, only darkness seems to show,

The
most advanced who follow it, appear to backward go.

The
even path they travel is a rugged sort of trail,

The
highest virtue that they find is like a sunken vale,

The
purity they boast about, disgraceful is and stale.

The
broadest virtue is a thing they somehow seem to lose,

The
firmest virtue that they hold is like a poor refuse,

And changeable and fickle is the rectitude
they use.

Their
greatest square is grown so great no corners can it show,

Their
vessels are so huge they never have the time to grow,

Their
voices are so very loud they cannot make a sound,

And
the forms that they produce so vast that shape is never found.

Tis
true the Tao is hidden; that it is nameless here;

But
for giving and imparting, and for making all things clear,

And
for making them complete, it is the Tao without a peer.

When great scholars heard of Tao, they diligently followed it.

When mediocre scholars heard of Tao, sometimes they kept it, sometimes they lost it.

When inferior scholars heard of Tao, they laughed at it.

Whether they laugh or whether they follow, Tao remains active.

Therefore the poets have said:

Brightness of Tao seems to be dark,

Progress in Tao seems going back,

The aim of Tao seems confused.

The highest Tao seems lowliest,

Great purity seems full of shame,

The fullest Teh seems incomplete.

Teachers of Teh have lost their zeal

And certain Truth appears to change.

A great square with inner angles,

A great vase unfinished,

A great voice never heard,

A great Image with inner form.

Tao is hid within its Name,

But by Tao the Masters bless,

And all things bring to perfectness.

When a wise scholar hears the Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

They practice it without fail.

When a average scholar hears the

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

They move between belief and unbelief.

When a worthless scholar hears the

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

They laugh loudly at it.

If such a one does not laugh at it,

The Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ) would not be the Tao ( the Laws of the

Universe )!

To the untrained observer;

Who understands the Tao, seems foolish;

Who progresses in the Tao, seems to fail;

Who follows the Tao, seems to wander.

The wise people of old have truly said:

The bright Way looks dim.

The forward Way looks backward.

The smooth Way looks rough.

High Virtue (Power) looks low like a bottomless pit.

Great clearness looks spotted.

Unending Virtue (Power) looks like it is not enough.

Proved Virtue (Power) looks pitiful.

Solid Virtue (Power) looks as though melted.

Greatest space has no corners.

Great talents are slowly mastered.

Great music has the rarest sound.

Great Form is shapeless.

The Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ) is hidden and nameless;

It alone knows how to give help and to make whole.

When a gentleman of top grade hears about the Way, he does his best to put it into practice.

When a gentleman of middle grade hears about the Way, he seems now to keep it, now to lose it.

When a gentleman of bottom grade hears about the Way, he will laugh loudly at it.

If it were not laughed at, it would not be worth regarding as the Way.

For there is an established saying:

"The bright Way looks dark.

The progressive Way looks retrograde.

The level Way looks rugged.

The highest Virtue looks like a valley.

Sheer white looks soiled.

The widest Virtue looks inadequate.

The firmest Virtue looks feeble.

The truest substance looks pitted.

The greatest square has no corners.

The greatest vessel is the last completed.

The greatest music has the rarest sound.

The greatest Image has no form.

The Way is hidden and without names. Indeed, just because the Way is able to lend it is able to complete."

Scholars of the highest class, when they hear about the Tao,

earnestly carry it into practice. Scholars of the middle class, when

they have heard about it, seem now to keep it and now to lose it.

Scholars of the lowest class, when they have heard about it, laugh

greatly at it. If it were not (thus) laughed at, it would not be fit

to be the Tao.

Therefore
the sentence-makers have thus expressed themselves:--

'The
Tao, when brightest seen, seems light to lack;

Who progress in it makes, seems drawing back;

Its even way is like a rugged track.

Its highest virtue from the vale doth rise;

Its greatest beauty seems to offend the eyes;

And he has most whose lot the least supplies.

Its firmest virtue seems but poor and low;

Its solid truth seems change to undergo;

Its largest square doth yet no corner show

A vessel great, it is the slowest made;

Loud is its sound, but never word it said;

A semblance great, the shadow of a shade.'

The
Tao is hidden, and has no name; but it is the Tao which is

skilful at imparting (to all things what they need) and making them

complete.

Reversals are the way of this Path, and weakness is it's strength.

All
creatures are born of Being; Being is born from Nonbeing.

When
seers see their nothingness

They never let it out of sight

But others see it now and then

And miss out on its true delight

Still
others only laugh it off

And look at it with ridicule

It wouldn't be the real truth

If it weren't laughed at by the fool

The
brightest way seems darkness

Just going on seems like retreat

The simple way seems difficult

Capacity seems like defeat

Clarity
can seem obscure

And love seem not to care

Totality seems not enough

And truth can seem to err

Awareness
doesn't have a name

To all appearances is null

Yet it produces everything

And so this empty place is full

WHEN a wise scholar hears the Tao,

He practises it diligently.

When a mediocre scholar hears the Tao,

He wavers between belief and unbelief.

When a worthless scholar hears the Tao,

He laughs boisterously at it.

But if such a one does not laugh at it,

The Tao would not be the Tao!

The wise men of old have truly said:

The bright Way looks dim.

The progressive Way looks retrograde.

The smooth Way looks rugged.

High Virtue looks like an abyss.

Great whiteness looks spotted.

Abundant Virtue looks deficient.

Established Virtue looks shabby.

Solid Virtue looks as though melted.

Great squareness has no corners.

Great talents ripen late.

Great sound is silent.

Great Form is shapeless.

The Tao is hidden and nameless;

Yet it alone knows how to render help and to fulfill.

When a deep person hears of the Tao, they study and put it into practice, embodying the practice of Tao in their life.

When a common person hears of the Tao, they half follow it, but half forget it in their daily life.

When a shallow person hears of the Tao, they laugh out loud. If they did not laugh out loud it would not be the Way.

Thus it is that the wise sages said:

Those understanding the brightness of Tao seem dim,

Those who walk the Way of Tao seem to go backward,

Those walking the direct path of Tao seem to wander long.

This is because the brightest light voluntarily dims itself,

The highest virtue is as deep as a valley,

And the Tao in its straightness seems rough and difficult.

The greatest caution can seem as cowardice,

The most insightful clarity can seem as opacity,

The greatest square can seem to have no apparent corner.

The greatest wisdom seems unsophisticated,

And the greatest form has no shape.

The Tao is great but hidden,

It is known by all, but remains nameless,

Yet it is the Tao alone that gives rise to all, and completes all.

When a superior person hears of the Tao,

She diligently puts it into practice.

When an average person hears of the Tao,

he believes half of it, and doubts the other half.

When a foolish person hears of the Tao,

he laughs out loud at the very idea.

If he didn't laugh,

it wouldn't be the Tao.

Thus
it is said:

The brightness of the Tao seems like darkness,

the advancement of the Tao seems like retreat,

the level path seems rough,

the superior path seems empty,

the pure seems to be tarnished,

and true virtue doesn't seem to be enough.

The virtue of caution seems like cowardice,

the pure seems to be polluted,

the true square seems to have no corners,

the best vessels take the most time to finish,

the greatest sounds cannot be heard,

and the greatest image has no form.

The
Tao hides in the unnamed,

Yet it alone nourishes and completes all things.

The wise leader, learning how things happen, lives accordingly.

The average leader also learns how things happen, but vacillates, now acting accordingly and then forgetting.

The worst leaders learn how things happen and dismiss the single principle as total nonsense. How else could their work be so futile?

After all, they say, any principle that does not get you love or money or power must be useless. A silent mind is a dumb mind. Selflessness is no way to get ahead. Virtue is for fools. Kindness is weakness. And so on.

This is a problem: because the wise leader's only allegiance is to how things happen, people who do not see how things happen naturally think that the wise leader's behaviour has no basis in reality. Also, the leader's silence and manner of being are disturbing. Because the leader's motives are obscure, the leader is hard to figure out.

The problem comes back to the fact that the principle is not a thing and cannot be defined. That does not make sense to some people.

It is not easy to understand a person whose foundation is invisible.

When wise people hear about the Tao

They follow it carefully.

When ordinary people hear about the Tao

They can take it or leave it.

When foolish people hear about the Tao

They laugh out loud.

If they didn't laugh out loud, it wouldn't be the Tao!

Therefore it is said:

The path into light seems dark.

The way ahead seems to go backwards.

The path into peace seems rough.

The greatest good seems to us empty.

True purity seems stained.

The best efforts seem inadequate.

Appropriate caution seems like cowardice.

True essence seems violated.

The truly square bears no corners. Sound vessels take time to build.

Celestia music is seldom paid much heed.

The greatest image is impossible to capture. The Tao is hidden and

nameless

Yet it is the Tao alone that nourishes

and completes All things.

When
a person seeking peace and harmony

discovers the oneness of Infinity,

she embraces it completely.

When the average person

remembers the oneness of Infinity,

he has a hard time maintaining it.

When a confused person is

confronted with the oneness of Infinity,

he laughs loudly.

If he did not laugh, his confusion would

not be so obvious.

The
oneness of Infinity is beyond distinctions

and is always present.

That is why things seem confusing to those who

acknowledge distinctions.

The
light merges into darkness.

Forward looks similar to backward.

The easy path manifests difficulty.

Virtue seems hollow.

Purity becomes an illusion.

The static is dynamic.

Strength degenerates into weakness.

Truth has no foundation.

The
great square has no corners.

A circle is a series of points.

Great music seems like the wind.

Images have no shape.

The
oneness of Infinity permeates all things

and merges them together.

Infinity manifests all things to completion

and disintegrates all manifestations

forever.

When a great scholar hears of the Way,

he adopts it and practices it.

When a fair scholar hears of the Way,

he sometimes remembers and sometimes forgets.

When a poor scholar hears of the Way,

he laughs outright.

If he did not laugh, it would not be the Way.

Hence, these phrases ...

The simple way seems unwise.

The fruitful way seems useless.

The smooth way seems rough.

Highest Virtue is like a Valley.

Great honesty seems insulting.

Broad Virtue seems insufficient.

Good Reputation seems undeserved.

True Character seems uncertain.

Great principle takes no sides.

Great ability arrives late.

Good speech strives for clarity.

Great Form has no shape.

Tao is hidden and nameless,

but only Tao permits early results.

When the superior man hears of the Tao, he practises it diligently.

When the average man hears about the Tao, he follows it only intermittently.

When the foolish man hears of the Tao, he bursts out laughing.

But for this laughter Tao would not be Tao.

Hence, the ancients have said:

The lightest path seems to be dark;

Going forward seems like going back;

The easy way seems to be hard;

The highest Virtue seems empty;

That which is pure seems sullied;

Ample Virtue appears inadequate;

Strength to be had from Virtue seems lacking;

Virtue itself appears unreal.

The greatest space has no corners;

The greatest talent develops slowly;

The loudest sound cannot be heard;

The greatest form has no shape.

Tao is hidden and without a name;

Yet it is Tao which nourishes all things and brings everything to completion.

Upon hearing the Way,

First-class people stand up and go with it.

Second-class people go around in circles about it.

Third-class people laugh loudly at it,

And if they don't laugh, it won't be the true Way.

Therefore we may say:

He/She who is wise on the Way seems foolish;

He/She who progresses towards the Way seems to retreat;

He/She who walks the Way evenly

Seems to climb a mountain;

Those who receive most from the Way seem totally deprived;

The pure white person seems a soiled disgrace;

The richest person seems the poorest;

The strongest person seems the weakest;

The truest person seems the most false;

The biggest square has no corner;

The loudest sound can not be heard;

And the largest image cannot be seen;

For what the Way gives and achieves best is nameless.

"When the best shih hears Tao, he puts out great effort to practice it. When the average shih hears Tao, he will keep it sometimes, and sometimes forget about it.

When the poorest shih hears Tao, he just has a big laugh." If he does not laugh, it must not quite be Tao.

Yes, the 'Well-Founded Sayings' has it: The bright Tao seems dark the Tao going forward seems to be going backward the smooth Tao seems rough. The loftiest Te seems like a valley great purity seems sullied abundant Te seems insufficient

Well-founded Te seems flimsy what is pure and natural seems faded the best square has no corners A great bronze takes long to finish great music has a delicate sound the Great Image has no shape.

Tao is something concealed, nameless. It is just Tao, good at sustaining a person and completing him.

The wise, having learned about Tao, aspires to self-realization in It.

The unwise, having learned about Tao, sometime keeps It in his memory and sometime loses.

Fool people, having learned about Tao, ridicule It. They consider insane those who cognized Tao... They view the wisdom as insanity..., the higher justice — as vice, the righteousness — as depravity, the great truth — as false...

Yes, the great square has no corners; the great sound cannot be heard; the great image cannot be seen...

Yes, Tao is hidden from idle looks. It leads to the Perfection only those deserving!

Hearing about the Tao Way, the Wise Person will follow,

The mediocre sometimes follows sometimes not.

Hearing about the Tao Way, the ignorant foolishly amuses.

Wouldn't
be the Tao Way, if an ignorant doesn't behave foolishly.

That is why it is said:

"The ignorant doesn't appreciate an enlightened person,

A good advice is seen worthless,

A good path to follow is ignored."

The
Wise Person looks empty like a valley,

The pure Virtue looks to be without core,

It's difficult to see the end of the extended full.

That which is simple looks without consistence.

There
is a way of perfection.

The universe doesn't stop in a point.

Knowledge needs time to accumulate.

Music is learned going towards the subtle realm.

The
Tao Way cannot be contained, in its manifestation

Brings fulfillment to the person on the perfection path.

When
the superior knight-scholar hears of the Dao, he diligently puts it into practice.
When the average knight-scholar hears of the Dao, it is half as though he preserves
[the concept of] it in his mind and half as though it is lost. When the inferior
knight-scholar hears of the Dao, he laughs uproariously at the notion. If such
a one did not laugh at it, it would be something too inadequate to be the Dao.
So an established saying states that the brightness of the Dao seems like darkness,
the advance of the Dao seems like retreat, the level Dao seems rough, the superior
virtue seems like a gully, the whitest white seems sullied, ample virtue seems
inadequate, firmly established virtue seems stealthy, pristine virtue seems
polluted, the greatest square has no corners, the greatest vessels are completed
late, the greatest sound is inaudible, the greatest image has no form. The Dao
hides itself in namelessness. Now only the Dao is good at bestowing [things
upon the creatures of the world] and bringing [them] to completion.

The superior man, on hearing Tao,

Practices it diligently.

The average man, on hearing Tao,

Regards it both as existing and not existing.

The inferior man, on hearing Tao,

Laughs aloud at it.

Without his laughter, it would not be Tao.

Therefore the established word says:

The luminous Tao seems obscure.

The advancing Tao seems retreating.

The even Tao seems rough.

The highest virtue seems empty.

Great whiteness seems blackened.

Broad virtue seems insufficient.

Established virtue seems secret.

Pure substance seems fluid.

The great square has no corners.

The great vessel is late in completing.

The great voice sounds faint.

The great image has no shape.

Tao is concealed and has no name.

Yet only Tao is good in giving and completing.

Mastering the Paradox

When superior leaders hear of the Tao,

They diligently try to practice it.

When average leaders hear of the Tao,

They appear both aware and unaware of it.

When inferior leaders hear of the Tao,

They roar with laughter.

Without sufficient laughter, it could not be the Tao;

Hence the long-established sayings:

The Tao illuminated appears to be obscure;

The Tao advancing apperaas to be retreating;

The Tao leveled appears to be uneven.

Superior Power appears to be low;

Great clarity appears to be spotted;

Extensive Power appears to be insufficient;

Established Power appers to be stolen;

Substantial Power appears to be spurious.

The greatest space has no corners;

The greatest talents are slowly mastered;

The greatest music has the rarest sound;

The Great Image has no form.

The Tao is hidden and nameless,

Yet it is the Tao that skillfully supports and completes.

Be as a child and encompass the greatest wisdom. Do not seek, as the Dao is nowhere to be found. The river nourishes all things.

On hearing of the Way, the best of men

Will earnestly explore its length.

The mediocre person learns of it

And takes it up and sets it down.

But vulgar people, when they hear the news,

Will laugh out loud, and if they did not laugh,

It would not be the Way.

And
so there is a proverb:

"When going looks like coming back,

The clearest road is mighty dark."

Today,
the Way that's plain looks rough,

And lofty virtue like a chasm;

The purest innocence like shame,

The broadest power not enough,

Established goodness knavery,

Substantial worth like shifting tides.

Great space has no corners;

Great powers come late;

Great music is soft sound;

The great Form no shape.

The
Way is obscure and unnamed;

It is a skilled investor, nonetheless,

The master of accomplishment.

When the highest shi hear Tao, they diligently practice it.

When the average shi hear Tao, they half believe it.

When the lowest shi hear Tao, (thinking it empty) they laugh greatly at it.

If they didn't laugh, it would be contrary to Tao.

Therefore there are some old sayings:

"The Tao that is bright seems to be dark;

The Tao that goes forward seems to retreat;

The Tao that is level seems to be uneven;

The lofty De (Virtue) looks like a humble valley;

The greatest glory looks like disgrace;

The greatest De looks insufficient;

The vigorous De looks inert;

The simple purity looks changeable;

The great square has no corners;

The valuable vessel is always completed lastly;

The greatest sound sounds faint;

The greatest form looks formless."

Tao is hidden and nameless,

It is only Tao that initiates all beings and brings them to completion.

When the superior man hears the Dao, he diligently practices it.

When the average man hears the Dao, sometimes he retains it, sometimes he forgets it.

When the inferior man hears the Dao, he laughs loudly at it.

If he did not laugh, what he heard would not be worthy of being the Dao.

Therefore, as the established adage has it:

The bright Dao seems dark.

Advancing on the Dao seems retreat.

The smooth Dao seems rough.

Superior Virtue is like a valley.

Great whiteness seems soiled.

Vast virtue seems wanting.

Established virtue seems stealthy.

Simple authenticity seems compromised.

The great square has no corners.

The great vessel is slow to form.

The great note is inaudible.

The great image is formless.

The Dao may be hidden and nameless, but it alone is good at bestowing and completing.

1. When the highest type of men hear the Way, with diligence thye're able to
practice it;

2. When the average men hear the Way, some things they retain and others they
lose;

3. When the lowest type of men hear the Way, they laugh out loud at it.

4. If they didn't laught at it, it couldn't be regarded as the Way.

5.
Therefore, there is a set saying about this that goes:

6. The bright Way appears to be dark;

7. The Way that goes forward appears to retreat;

8. The smooth Way appears to be uneven;

9. The highest virtue [is empty] like a valley;

10. The purest white appears to be soiled;

11. Vast virtue appears to be insufficient;

12. Firm virtue appears thin and weak;

13. The simplest reality appears to change.

14.
The Great Square has no corners;

15. The Great Vessel takes long to complete;

16. The Great Tone makes little sound;

17. The Great Image has no shape.

18.
The Way is Great but has no name.

19. Only the Way is good at beginning things and also good at bringing things
to completion.

When a wise
person hears about Tao,

he gets right with it.

When an ordinary person

hears about Tao,

he tries to get right with it,

but eventually gives up.

When a fool hears about Tao,

he just laughs and laughs.

If he didn't laugh, it wouldn't be Tao.

Here's what
they find so funny:

The path to enlightenment

seems covered in shadows.

The way forward

feels like taking a step back.

The easiest path seems difficult.

Those with the most virtue

seem debased.

Those who are most pure

seem to be grubby and soiled.

The deepest thoughts appear shallow.

The greatest strength

looks like weakness.

What is most real

strikes us as imaginary.

The largest space has no boundaries.

The greatest talent

seems to produce nothing.

The greatest voice is unhearable.

The greatest beauty is invisible.

Tao is hidden
to us

and it has no name.

It is the source and the strength of all things.

.

What the Way is Like

When the wise hear the Way, they practice it diligently.

When the mediocre hear of the Way, they doubt it.

When the foolish hear of the Way, they laugh out loud.

If it were not laughed at, it would not be the Way.

Therefore it is said,

"The enlightenment of the Way seems like dullness;

progression in the Way seem like regression;

the even path of the Way seems to go up and down."

Great power appears like a valley.

Great purity appears tarnished.

Great character appears insufficient.

Solid character appears weak.

True integrity appears changeable.

Great space has no corners.

Great ability takes time to mature.

Great music has the subtlest sound.

Great form has no shape.

The Way is hidden and indescribable.

Yet the Way alone is adept

at providing for all and bringing fulfillment.

The wise man hearing of Tao follows him.

Less wise men hearing of Tao turn to him and again turn away fro him.

Unwise men hearing of Tao laugh at him.

To fools the highest can appear but foolish.

To them the saying applies:

One enlightened by Tao looks dark advancing toward the Tao he seems to go backward.

His wisdom looks like error his being filled with Tao like emptiness.

His virtue looks useless his kindness like stupidity.

Because Tao is his support he seems to have no support.

Because he rests quietly within himself he has a disquieting effect.

Because he does not calculate he appears incalculable.

For the invisible cannot be grasped the infinite cannot be measured the eternal cannot be fathomed the primordial ground cannot be probed.

Although it is the origin and completion of all beings Tao is hidden and without a name.

The Qualities of Tao-practicians

Lao Tze says,

The students of the highest class, when they hear about the Tao, try hard to put it into practice.

The students of middle class, when they hear about the Tao, seem to be aware and yet unaware of it.

The students of the lowest class, when they hear about it, laugh greatly at it.

If it were not thus laughed at, it would not be the Tao.

Therefore, I try to give a few words about the Tao-practicians:

Those who are advancing in the Tao seem drawing back.

The Tao's way is even but seems like a rugged track.

The superior Teh is inclusive to anything as a valley.

The purest character seems humiliating.

The abundant Teh seems destitute.

And the Teh is established secretly as a thief proceeding to do his work.

Its solid truth seems to undergo change.

Its largest square does no corner show.

The great masterpieces are slow in completion.

The hugest note is seldom sounded.

The greatest image has no certain form.

The Tao is hidden, and has no name, but it is adept at lending its power and bringing fulfillment.

SAMENESS AND DIFFERENCE

On
hearing of the Tao,

the wise student's practice is with diligence;

the average student attends to his practice

when his memory reminds him so to do;

and the foolish student laughs.

But we do well to remember

that with no sudden laughter,

there would be no natural way.

Thus
it is said,

"There are times when even brightness seems dim;

when progress seems like regression;

when the easy seems most difficult,

and virtue seems empty, inadequate and frail;

times when purity seems sullied;

when even reality seems unreal,

and when a square seems to have corners;

when even great talent is of no avail,

and the highest note cannot be heard;

when the formed seems formless,

and when the way of nature is out of sight".

Even in such times as these,

the natural way still nourishes,

that all things may be fulfilled.

When a superior man hears of the Tao,

he immediately begins to embody it.

When an average man hears of the Tao,

he half believes it, half doubts it.

When a foolish man hears of the Tao,

he laughs out loud.

If he didn't laugh,

it wouldn't be the Tao.

Thus it is said:

The path into the light seems dark,

the path forward seems to go back,

the direct path seems long,

true power seems weak,

true purity seems tarnished,

true steadfastness seems changeable,

true clarity seems obscure,

the greatest are seems unsophisticated,

the greatest love seems indifferent,

the greatest wisdom seems childish.

The Tao is nowhere to be found.

Yet it nourishes and completes all things.

The superior scholar hears of Dao, he may devote himself to it and follow it;

the average scholar hears of Dao, he sometimes understands it and sometimes he ignores it;

and the inferior scholar hears of Dao, he greatly ridicules it.

If it is not superior, it would not be Dao.

Thus, there are sayings in the Book of Establishment:

Enlightened Dao looks as if obscured;

advanced Dao looks as if retreating and the smooth way of Dao looks as if rugged;

high virtue looks as if common;

the superior distinction may seem indistinct;

abundant virtue looks as if insufficient;

vigorous virtue looks as if easy-going and pure virtue looks as if stupidity.

The superior square may seem to be cornerless.

The superior personality may be established late.

The superior sound may have no way to be heard.

The superior model may seem to be insignificant.

The function of Dao has no name.

It is Dao - the impartial law of nature that knows best how to help and accomplish.

When eminent persons hear of Tao,

They practice it faithfully;

When average persons hear of Tao,

It seems that they practice it, and it seems they do not;

When inferior persons hear of Tao,

They ridicule it.

Without such ridicule, it would not be Tao.

Thus, the aphorism that suggests the way is:

Knowing the Tao seems costly.

Entering Tao seems like retreating.

Becoming equal with Tao gives birth to paradoxes.

Eminent action is like a valley.

Complete understanding resembles being disgraced.

Vast action seems yielding.

Action that builds up seems remiss.

Pure integrity seems perverse.

The great square has no angles.

The great talent matures late.

The great voice sounds faint.

The great image has no form.

The Tao is praised but is unnameable.

Only Tao is good at beginning and good at completion.

XLI

One
man, hearing of the way, will strive to follow it

Another will practice it sometimes, and not others

A third will hear of it, and laugh at how useless it sounds

And that's as it should be.

The
clearest path is often easily missed

The easiest seems to go in the wrong direction

The smoothest looks rutted and rough

True strength is hidden, like seeds in a valley before the rains

True white shows every blotch and blemish

True virtue feels pathetic, thin, weak, insufficient

Such
is the way of words; they always fail in their ideals

Does an infinite square have corners or edges?

Could a cup be molded to hold everything, including itself?

Can a note sound that has all tones, and none?

Would everything seen at once look like anything at all?

The
tao is eternal, too large and too small for names

Only it can begin things and bring them to their ends

When Superior People Hear of the Way

When superior people hear of the Way,

They carry it out with diligence.

When middling people hear of the Way,

it sometimes seems to be there, sometimes not.

When lesser people hear of the Way,

they ridicule it greatly.

If they didn't laugh at it,

it wouldn't be the Way.

So there are constructive sayings on this:

The Way of illumination seems dark,

the Way of advancement seems retiring,

the Way of equality seems to categorize;

higher virtue seems empty,

great purity seems ignominious,

broad virtue seems insufficient,

constructive virtue seems careless.

Simple honesty seems changeable,

great range has no boundaries,

great vessels are finished late;

the great sound has a rarefied tone,

the great image has no form,

the Way hides in namelessness.

Only the Way can enhance and perfect.

When hearing Tao, the intelligent people practice it diligently.

The average people practice it casually.

Ignorant people laugh at it.

If it were not laughed at, it would not be Tao.

It is said that true Tao-followers appear to be ignorant.

Although they are making progress, they appear to be receding.

The perfect Tao appears to be blemished.

High Te is like the valleys.

Bright white appears to be tarnished.

Broad kindness appears to be insufficient.

Diligent people could look lazy.

Authentic qualities could look faked.

A great square appears to have no corner.

Great success does not achieve early.

Great music does not sound loud.

Great image does not have form.

Tao is invisible and nameless.

It is only Tao that can lend help and make endeavors successful.

When a man of high learning hears the Way, he diligently practices it.

When a man of ordinary learning hears the Way, he seems to remember it and not to remember it.

When a man of little learning hears the Way, he laughs loud.

If this man did not laugh, the Way would not be enough to be the Way.

Hence, the men of old have truly said:

"The Way that is bright seems dull.

The Way that advances seems to move backward.

The Way that is smooth seems rugged.

High Virtue seems like an abyss.

Great whiteness seems spotted.

Abundant Virtue seems deficient.

Rigorous Virtue seems shabby.

Real essence seems empty.

Great squareness has no corners.

Great vessel takes long to complete.

Great voice has no sound.

The great image is formless."

The Way is hidden and nameless.

Yet it alone knows how to render help and to fulfill.

The wise student hears of the Tao, practices it diligently.

The average student hears of the Tao, gives it thought now and then.

The foolish student hears of the Tao, laughs aloud.

If there were no laughters, the Tao would not be the true Tao.

Hence it is said:

the bright path seems dim;

forwarding seems retreating;

easy way seems hard;

highest Virtue seems empty;

true white seems polluted.

a wealth of Virtue seems inadequate;

the strength of Virtue seems frail;

real Virtue seems unreal.

The infinite square has no corners.

Great talents ripen late.

The highest notes are hard to hear.

The greatest form has no shape.

The Tao is hidden and without name.

The Tao alone nourishes and brings everything to fulfillment.

The wise student on hearing the Tao

diligently puts it into practice.

The average student on hearing the Tao

keeps it one minute and loses it the next.

The mediocre student on hearing the Tao

laughs at it loudly.

If this student did not laugh it would not be the Tao.

Therefore,
the ancient proverb says:

The
bright path seems dull.

The path that goes torward seems to lead backward.

The even path seems up and down.

The greatest whiteness seems soiled.

High
Virtue seems like a canyon.

Abundant Virtue seems deficient.

Vigorous Virtue seems limp.

Simple Virtue seems faded.

The
greatest square has no corners.

The greatest vessel takes long to complete.

The greatest note is hard to hear.

The greatest image has no shape.

The
Tao is hidden and narneless;

yet, it is the Tao alone that supports all thing?;

and brings them to completion.

When
good persons hear of the way

they do their best to practice it.

When average persons hear of the way

they like to talk about it.

When lesser persons hear of the way

they disparage it by calling it godless or foreign.

If there were no derision, it would not be the way.

They say the true way,

compared to the light, often looks the darkest;

forward often looks like it goes backward;

flattest often looks the hilliest.

The best looks like the worst,

the clearest is the most obscure,

the most satisfying looks too little,

the strongest looks the weakest,

the most natural looks old and artificial.

The
largest circle has no curves

great abilities take the longest to develop

the finest music has the faintest notes

the universe has no shape

the way is hidden, has no name, no map.

How can it? It is everywhere.

When the highest of men hear of dao and truth they put it into practice quite
diligently.

When the common types hear of dao, they seem to be in two minds about it, half
believing, aware and unaware of some.

When the lowest types hear of dao, they ridicule or laugh loudly - but if they
did not laugh, it would be no dao.

The
proverb has it:

The way out into the light often looks dark; one who understands dao seems dull,
as dao which is bright appears to be dark.

The dao which goes forward appears to fall backward; the one who is advanced
(in dao) seems to slip backwards; the way that goes ahead often looks as if
it went back.

He who works and moves on the even dao [co-path] seems to go up and down; the
least hilly way often looks as if it went thus, as level dao appears uneven.

Great virtue seems hollow and empty. The truly loftiest might looks like an
abyss; superior virtue appears like a valley (hollow). Great capability is [granted
to be] hollow. Yes, the loftiest is something abysmal.

Sheerest white seems blurred, sheer white is like tarnished; (most) purity seems
like disgrace.

The most sufficing might looks inadequate; far-reaching virtue hardly seems
to be enough; and great [and rustic] character appears to be not enough [but
it's all the same].

The [organising] might that stands most firm seems flimsy. Solid character looks
infirm; and solid virtue unsteady.

Whats in its natural, pure state looks faded: True substance looks changeable,
and pure worth seems dirtied.

The largest square has no corners: great space has no corners.

The greatest capacities develop latest, and great talent could be slow to mature;
as they say: The greatest vessel takes the longest to finish. The great tool
and talent is slow to finish (or mature). Great tools do slow work. Great inside
talent takes long to ripen.

Great music is far from course; [at times] rare, it could be hard to get, or
hardly heard.

Great, hidden form has neither shape nor contour; as great here means of dao,
[which is thought up as] hidden and without (overtly sounded) name.

Now, dao backs all things financially; dao alone skilfully provides for all
- it supports all things and advances [some] to perfection. Well dao-lent power
could bring us (some degree of) fulfilment. Skilled, able dao-lending (of some
majesty and power) could bring [Christian] fulfilment.

When the superior man hears the Way,

he is scarcely able to put it into practice.

When the middling man hears the Way,

he appears now to preserve it, now to lose it.

When the inferior man hears the Way,

he laughs at it loudly.

If he did not laugh,

it would not be fit to be the Way.

For this reason,

There is a series of epigrams that says:

"The bright Way seems dim.

The forward Way seems backward.

The level Way seems bumpy.

Superior integrity seems like a valley.

The greatest whiteness seems grimy.

Ample integrity seems insufficient.

Robust integrity seems apathetic.

Plain truth seems sullied.

The great square has no corners.

The great vessel is never completed.

The great note sounds muted.

The great image has no form.

The Way is concealed and has no name."

Indeed,

The Way alone is good at beginning and good at completing.

When a wise man hears the Tao, he follows it.

When one of average mind hears it, he holds to it a while and presently loses it.

When a foolish man hears it, he only laughs at it.

If it were not held in derision by such men, it could not rightly be called Tao.

Therefore, as the verse-makers would say:-

Who shines with Tao is lost in shade;

His path in Tao is retrograde,

And all his actions are obscure.

The highest virtue has no name,

The greatest pureness seems but shame;

True wisdom seems the least secure.

Inherent goodness seems most strange;

What most endures is changeless Change;

And squareness doth no angles make.

The largest vessel none can gird; The loudest voice was never heard;

The greatest thing no form doth take.

For Tao is hidden, and it has no name; but it is good at beginning and finishing.

A Different Slant

One couple finds the Tao absurd,

so absurd that they laugh out loud.

They have no interest in mysterious things.

Another couple finds the Tao appealing,

but terribly impractical.

They have learned to live another way

and cannot see to change.

Yet another couple hears of the Tao

and immediately begins to live by it.

Their hearts are truly one.

The Tao may seem unrealistic

but contains deep truth;

may look difficult but is very simple;

may feel childish but embodies wisdom;

may sound indifferent but harbors great compassion.

Look carefully.

The Tao gives a slightly different slant

on the truths of your relationship.

No rules or easy steps.

Just a look into the heart of things.

Create your own steps to live it out.

When the highest type of men hear Tao, The diligently practice it.
When the average type of men hear Tao, They half believe in it.

When the lowest type of men hear Tao, They laugh heartily at it. If they did not laugh at it, it would not be Tao.

Therefore there is the established saying: The Tao which is bright
appears to be dark. The Tao which goes forward appears to fall backward.
The Tao which is level appears uneven. Great virtue appears like a
valley (hollow). Great purity appears like disgrace. Far-reaching virtue
appears as if insufficient.

Solid virtue appears as if unsteady. True substance appears to be
changeable. The great square has no corners. The great implement (or
talent) is slow to finish (or mature). Great music sounds faint. Great
form has no shape.

Tao is hidden and nameless. Yet it is Tao alone that skillfully provides for all and brings them to perfection.

Men of stamina,
knowing the way of life,

Steadily keep to it;

Unstable men, knowing the way of life,

Keep to it or not according to occasion;

Stupid men, knowing the way of life

And having once laughed at it, laugh again the louder.

If you need to be sure which way is right, you can tell by their laughing at
it.

They fling the old charges:

'A wick without oil,'

'For every step forward a step or two back.'

To such laughers a level road looks steep,

Top seems bottom,

'White appears black,

'Enough is a lack,'

Endurance is a weakness,

Simplicity a faded flower.

But eternity is his who goes straight round the circle,

Foundation is his who can feel beyond touch,

Harmony is his who can hear beyond sound,

Pattern is his who can see beyond shape:

Life is his who can tell beyond words

Fulfillment of the unfulfilled.

When people who have high DE learn about the DAO, they practice it diligently;

When people who have medium DE learn about the DAO, they sometimes treat it seriously, sometimes do not;

When people who have low DE learn about the DAO, they give it a big laugh.

If they do not laugh, the DAO is not the DAO.

Therefore, the great men once said,

"People who understand the DAO look dull;

The more you learn about the DAO, the more you feel like you are retreating;

The DAO looks like a smooth road, but when you walk on it, it is rough."

The people who have high DE always look as low as the valleys and riverbeds.

The people who have broad DE always look incomplete.

The people who have strong DE always look lazy.

The people who have real DE always look empty.

The whitest looks tainted,

The squarest looks like it has no right angle,

The greatest piece takes the longest time,

The biggest sound has no sound,

The biggest shape has no shape.

The DAO likes to hide and be anonymous.

Because the DAO always gives, it accomplishes everything.

When a superior person hears the Tao,

He practices it committedly.

When a mediocre person hears the Tao,

He practices it sometimes, but just as often ignores it.

When an inferior person hears the Tao,

He roars with disparaging laughter.

If he did not laugh, it would not be the Tao.

Thus the age-old epigrams state:

The enlightening way appears dark.

The advancing way appears retreating.

The level way appears bumpy.

The highest virtue appears ordinary.

The purest goodness appears sullied.

The abundant virtue appears deficient.

The perfect virtue appears defective.

The most genuine appears insincere.

The greatest space has no corners.

The greatest talent ripens late.

The greatest voice is silent.

The greatest image is formless.

The Tao is hidden and has no name.

Yet the Tao alone bestows the power and fulfills the destiny of everything.

Upon hearing the Way,

First-class people stand up and go with it.

Second-class people go around in circles about it.

Third-class people laugh loudly at it,

And if they don't laugh, it won't be the true Way.

Therefore we may say:

He/She who is wise on the Way seems foolish;

He/She who progresses towards the Way seems to retreat;

He/She who walks the Way evenly

Seems to climb a mountain;

Those who receive most from the Way seem totally deprived;

The pure white person seems a soiled disgrace;

The richest person seems the poorest;

The strongest person seems the weakest;

The truest person seems the most false;

The biggest square has no corner;

The loudest sound can not be heard;

And the largest image cannot be seen;

For what the Way gives and achieves best is nameless.

When a deep person hears of the Tao, they study and put it into practice, embodying the practice of Tao in their life.

When a common person hears of the Tao, they half follow it, but half forget it in their daily life.

When a shallow person hears of the Tao, they laugh out loud. If they did not laugh out loud it would not be the Way.

Thus it is that the wise sages said:

Those understanding the brightness of Tao seem dim,

Those who walk the Way of Tao seem to go backward,

Those walking the direct path of Tao seem to wander long.

This is because the brightest light voluntarily dims itself,

The highest virtue is as deep as a valley,

And the Tao in its straightness seems rough and difficult.

The greatest caution can seem as cowardice,

The most insightful clarity can seem as opacity,

The greatest square can seem to have no apparent corner.

The greatest wisdom seems unsophisticated,

And the greatest form has no shape.

The Tao is great but hidden,

It is known by all, but remains nameless,

Yet it is the Tao alone that gives rise to all, and completes all.

