===== Chapter 60 =====

Governing a great kingdom is like quick-frying small delicacies.

[When] using the Tao to manage the world

Its demons are powerless.

[It's] not [exactly] that its demons are powerless

[But that] their powers do not harm people.

Not [only is it] that their powers do not harm people

[But] the sages also do not harm people.

Both do not reciprocate harm.

This is the reason [their] virtues mix and thereupon return.

Govern big countries Like you cook a little fish.

When Tao harmonizes the world, Demons lose their power.

Not that demons lose their power, but their power does not harm people.
Not that their power does not harm people, but the Sage does not harm
people.

If neither does harm, Then Te flows and returns.

Rule a big country

The way you'd cook a small fish.

If Tao is used to govern the world

Evil spirits have no power.

Their power is not gone

But it does not harm the people.

Their power does not harm the people

And it does not harm the sage.

As they suffer no harm

Their virtues unite and return to them.

GENTLENESS

Rule and govern All Things with gentleness,

In harmony with the Tao.

Thus does the power of evil spirits remain unfulfilled -

Neither does the good spirit of the Sage cause harm.

The Sage himself, being likewise protected,

Unity and perfect harmony prevail for all.

Govern a great state as carefully as you would fry a small fish.

The Tao can govern Heaven below (the sacred body).

You are lost in a field without direction when you are not with your soul.

Surely being lost in a field without direction happens when you are not with your soul.

The soul does not enter the people like an arrow.

The soul surely does not enter the people like an arrow.

The sage does not enter the people like an arrow.

Both together will not enter the people like an arrow.

The action of the soul unifies and restores the path, indeed.

THE DUTY OF GOVERNMENT

The government of a kingdom is like the cooking of fish.

If
the kingdom be ruled according to the Tao, the spirits of our

ancestors will not manifest their Teh. These spirits have this Teh, but

will not turn it against men. It is able to hurt men; so also is the

Wise King; but he doth not.

When
these powers are in accord, their Good Will produceth the Teh,

endowing the people therewith.

Governing a great state is like cooking small fish. Let the kingdombe governed according to the Tao, and the manes of the departed will notmanifest their spiritual energy. It is not that those manes have not thatspiritual energy, but it will not be employed to hurt men. It is not thatit could not hurt men, but neither does the ruling sage hurt them. Whenthese two do not injuriously affect each other, their good influences convergein the virtue (of the Tao).

Making sure that mankind lives in peace is a trifle

Where righteousness is the main guide, delusions won't last

Not that there will be no delusions at all

But the people will be less susceptible to them

Delusions damage people, and a wise man shows them it's so

Therefore a wise man is a threat to delusion,

But no threat for mankind

Therefore they will become wise, too

Whether governing a big country or cooking a little fish, follow Nature's way and no evil tendencies will get control.

This does not mean that the dangers of evils can be eliminated entirely, but only that they will cease to harm men.

When ordinary men are unharmed, their leaders are unharmed.

And when nobody harms anybody, perfect harmony prevails.

Ruling a large kingdom is indeed like cooking small fish.

They who by Tao all that is under heaven

Did not let an evil spirit within them display its powers.

Nay, it was not only that the evil spirit did not display its powers;

Neither was the Sage's good spirit used to the hurt of other men.

Nor was it only that his good spirit was not used to harm other men,

The Sage himself was thus saved from harm.

And so, each being saved from harm,

Their "powers" could converge towards a common end.

Governing a country is like cooking a delicate fish.

Rule in observance of Tao

and the forces of adversity become harmless.

They do not lose their power,

only their power to harm.

The sage, too, does no harm

and so he is not harmed.

Virtue flows unimpeded.

Ruling a great country is like cooking a little fish

This is how the way manages (all) under heaven

(Whether) the ghosts lack spirit

Or the ghosts do not lack spirit

(Whether) the spirits avoid harming people

Or the spirits do not avoid harming people

Wise ones still avoid harming people

Now as neither of these haunts the other

So virtue interacts & comes back home to them

Emotions

Ruling a large state is like cooking a small fish.

When you use the Way to govern the world,

Evil spirits will not have godlike power,

It is that their power will not harm men.

But it is not only that their powers will not harm men,

The sage also, will not harm them.

Since these two do not do not harm others,

Therfore their Virtues intermingle and returns to them.

Governing a large country is like cooking a small fish.

If it's done in accordance with Tao, nothing bad will happen. Guide the world with Tao, and evil won't be a problem.

Not that it won't be around, but it won't find an opening, it can't harm anyone.

The sage doesn't harm anyone, either. When there's no harm on this side, no harm on that, goodness flows back and forth like water.

In leading others, use care and restraint,

As if you were frying a small fish.

Let the Tao be your guide,

And the demons of power will return

To their original nature.

For their power is a delusion-

An empty, noisy abstraction.

All power is harmless

To one whose true self leads.

Such a leader can protect the people,

For he is protected by the Sage,

And the Sage is protected by the Tao.

When a follower of Modesty leads,

Then all are made safe-

The leader, the people, the nation-

These unite with the Sage

In a continual return

To a deeper understanding.

Lao Tzu, with his characteristic gentle humor, uses a seemingly mundane image to make a point about a matter of immense substance to both his own time and ours. Cooking a fish may seem mundane indeed compared to governing a nation, but it wasn't for a common person living in Lao Tzu's time in ancient China. You had to work to catch a fish and prepare the materials necessary for cooking it, and you weren't likely to get a second chance at dinner if you did it wrong. Aside from the work of catching the fish, a fire had to be built and tended until it was a bed of hot coals appropriate for cooking. The ting, or cooking pot used in those days, had to be properly set over the heat for optimal results, and attention had to be directed toward the entire process. This might have involved shaking the ting regularly, so that the fish cooked itself, as it were, in its own fat, and then recognizing the visual signs of "done-ness."

This kind of care and attention is what Lao Tzu would like leaders among people to apply to their governmental and administrative functions, for it is this non-intrusive and modest attention that allows the Tao and its helpers to complete the work of both cooking (providing outer nourishment) and leadership (providing inner nourishment). Even where the details vary (according to the kind of fish you are cooking, or the population you are leading), there is a common element to the experience: removing power and its trappings from the relationship, and allowing it to be transformed from a demonic display of force and manipulation, into a natural harmony between the leader and the led. At all events, it must be remembered that the nourishment and protection come not from ourselves, but from the hidden consciousness that is aroused by Modesty (Te).

There is a palpable lesson in this poem for modern leaders—especially those who contemplate the invasion of foreign lands with the most spurious and concocted justification. To thus attack and destroy the land and homes of others, when there exist far more efficient means of resolving a conflict, is to "burn the fish" and rob the people of the nourishment they most need—their own individual, inner independence.

Do, But Never Overdo

Rule
a great state

as you cook a small fish:

do not overdo it!

Rule
with Tao and evil departs.

Evil will still have power,

but it will not harm the people.

Then
not only does evil cease to do harm,

the ruler also ceases to do harm,

and therefore both possess Teh.

Govern a great state as you would fry a small fish.

Employ the Tao to establish the Empire and the daemons will display no energy; no that they are devoid of energy, but that they will not use it to man's detriment; (further) not only will man suffer no hurt from the daemons but he will not be injured by the sages.

When neither harm, the attributes of the Tao blend and converge.

Govern a great state as you would cook a small fish (do it gently).

Let Tao reign over the world, and no spirits will show their ghostly powers.

Not that the spirits have no more powers,

But their powers will not harm men.

Nor will the Sage harm the people.

Inasmuch as none of them harms anybody,

Therefore virtue belongs to them both.

Skill at Ruling

Ruling a large state

Is like grilling a small bit of fresh food.

Using a guide to manage the social world

Its ghost does not energize.

If it is not that its ghost does not energize,

Its energy does not harm humans.

If it is not that its energy does not harm humanity,

Sages also do not harm humans.

In general, when both of these do not mutually harm,

Then virtuosity exchanges and returns in it.

When Tao prevails in the world, evil loses its power.

It is not that evil no longer possesses spiritual power.

It is that its power does not damage men.

Indeed, it is not that its power does not damage men.

It is primarily that the ruler does not become harmful to men.

When opposites no longer damage each other,

Both are benefitted through the attainment of Tao.

Governing a large country is like cooking a small fish.

It is spoiled by too much interference.

When the ruler presents his country with Tao, Heaven will not harm him.

Not only will the curse not fall upon him, but it will not even cause harm to the people.

As the curse will not hurt the people, neither will the sage cause harm to the people.

Only because they do not hurt one another, will they blend their virtue.

Governing a large state

Is like frying small fish.

Use the Tao to preside over the empire,

And its spirits will not be mischievous;

Not that its spirits will not be mischievous,

But that their mischief will not harm the people;

Not that their mischief will not harm the people,

But that a sage man never does any harm.

Since neither harms anyone,

Their favors will converge.

When ruling people, like serving heaven, the sage acts only in moderation.

Only with moderation can he learn the Tao in an instant.

This study is called "the rapid accumulation of a virtue."

Through the rapid accumulation of a virtue

He can overcome everything.

Since there is nothing he cannot overcome,

No one can know of his superiority.

Since no one knows of his superiority,

He can rule the country.

Since what he does when he acquires everything is identified with the mother, his days are extended.

Thus his roots are deep and his foundations strong, and he knows the way of longevity and immortality.

Governing a large state is like boiling a small fish.

When
the empire is ruled in accordance with the way,

The spirits lose their potencies.

Or rather, it is not that they lose their potencies,

But that, though they have their potencies, they do not harm the people.

It is not only they who, having their potencies, do not harm the people,

The sage, also, does not harm the people.

As neither does any harm, each attributes the merit to the other.

How to Maintain One's Place

Govern a great country as you would fry small fish: [neither gut nor scale them.]

If with Reason the empire is managed, its ghosts will not spook. Not only will its ghosts not spook, but its gods will not harm the people. Not only will its gods not harm the people, but neither will its holy men harm the people. Since neither will do harm, therefore their virtues will be combined.

In fathering, care must be taken not to spoil a child. If you give more than is asked, this is excessive. When you follow the natural way, good or bad cannot sway you. You realise that which is considered bad, may be good, and visa versa. Dropping ideas of good or bad, your actions are natural.

Govern a large state is like frying a small fish.

With Direction embracing the world, ghosts become ineffective.

It is not because ghosts become ineffective;

it is because their effect becomes inoffensive.

Not only have ghosts become inoffensive;

The sage has also become inoffensive.

With the two not inflicting harm, the people are showered with virtue.

Govern a great nation as you would cook a small fish.

Use Way to rule all beneath heaven and spirits never become ghosts.

When spirits don't become ghosts, ghosts do people no harm.

When ghosts do people no harm, sages do them no harm.

And once humans and ghosts do each other no harm, they return together to Integrity.

Governing a large state is like cooking a small fish.

Let Tao prevail in the world,

Even the spiritual beings lose their divine appeal.

Not only they lose their appeal,

Their appeal harms no people.

Not only their appeal harms no people,

Neither the ruler harms people.

Since both inflict no harm,

Then all the benefits accrue jointly to the people.

Governing
a great nation looks like cooking tiny fish.

When
it happens that tao is present in the world

What is clever lacks spirit

What is not clever lacks spirit

What has spirit is not wounding man

What has no spirit is not wounding man.

Sages
also are not wounding man.

In
the end both are without wounding each other

So ideal is reached, merges, comes within.

To govern a great state, one should act like someone cooking a very small fish (very delicately, otherwise they break up).

When a state is governed according to the Principle, phantoms do not appear there to harm the people, because the Sage who governs does not harm the people.

Not that the spirits have no more powers, But their powers will not harm men./ Neither will they harm men, Nor will the Sage harm the people.

The merit of this double tranquility (on the part of the living and the dead) comes back, therefore, to the Sage.

Ruling a large country is like cooking a small fish

Using the Tao to manage the world

Its demons have no power

Not only do its demons have no power

Its gods do not harm people

Not only do its gods not harm people

The sages also do not harm people

They both do no harm to one another

So virtue merges and returns

Governing a great country is like cooking a small fish. If you use too much heat, you will overcook it; if you keep turning the fish over and over, it will fall apart. Similarly, if a ruler constantly meddles in the affairs of the people with excessive rules and regulations, the country becomes chaotic and everyone suffers.

When the Tao has arrived and is present in the world, peace and harmony prevail so that the demons of the world lose the power to exert their negative influence. Similarly, when the Tao is present in your heart, your inner demons have no power over you.

It is not that the demons are rendered powerless by the prevailing peace of the Tao, but that their powers have no harmful effect on people. Similary, a true sage isn't someone who harbors absolutely no negativity in the heart, but someone who sees that negativity clearly so that it cannot exert a harmful influence on life.

The gods of the world also keep to their proper places and do not disrupt the people's lives. When we apply this concept to practical, everyday cultivation, it means the wisdom of the Tao prevents one from taking foolish actions out of positive intentions - actions that, although well-intended, still end up making things more complicated and more difficult.

Not only do the gods refrain from harming people out of misguided benevolence, the sages also refrain from meddling in people's lives. Acting in congruence with the Tao, the sages relax, let things be, and simply enjoy the process.

This gives us a world where gods and demons do no harm, whether to one another or anyone else. The rulers and the people also coexist peacefully. The goodness of this worldly manifestation lets the virtue and inherent power in everyone merge together and return to the Tao.

Notes

In this chapter as well as other chapters of the Tao Te Ching, governing a country serves as a metaphor for running one's life. Thus, we can also apply "cooking a small fish" to practical, everyday Tao cultivation.

Just as constantly changing rules and regulations disrupt people's lives, in governing your own life you also need to be careful not to second-guess yourself too much. People who succeed tend to make their decisions quickly and change their minds slowly, if at all. Conversely, people who fail in life are the ones who decide slowly but change their minds at the drop of a hat.

Once you cultivate the Tao to a certain point and get in touch with your inner self, you learn to trust and rely on the power of your intuition. It is capable of leading you to the correct decision in the blink of an eye. By contrast, dwelling on too much information has a way of leading to analysis paralysis rather than better decisions.

Next time you have a hunch or a gut feeling, go with it. The more you use your intuition, the more powerful and accurate it will become.

TO MAINTAIN POSITION

One should govern a great state as one fries small fish (i.e., do not scale or clean them).

With Tao one may successfully rule the Empire. Ghosts will not frighten, gods will not harm, neither will wise men mislead the people. Since nothing frightens or harms the people, teh will abide.

Governing a great state,

Is like cooking small fish.

If you rule the world by Tao,

The ghosts (kuei) will lose their spiritual (shen) power.

Not that the ghosts lose their spiritual power,

But their spiritual power will not harm the people.

Not that their spiritual power will not harm the people,

But neither does the sage harm the people.

Since both are harmless,

Te flows back and forth [without impediment].

Do But Never Overdo

Rule a great state as you cook a small fish: do not overdo it!

Rule with Tao and evil departs. Evil will still have power, but it will not harm the people. Then not only does evil cease to do harm, the ruler also ceases to do harm, and therefore both possess Teh.

Rule a large country as you would cook a small fish.

Follow the Tao, and evil will be subdued.

Evil will still be there, but it won't be able to do much harm.

The Tao–Master does no harm.

If no harm is done, then the power of the Tao can flow on.

Sixty

Ruling the country is like cooking a small fish.

Approach the universe with Tao,

And evil is not powerful, [
First Vintage Books edition, 1972
: "Not that evil is not powerful"]

But its power will not be used to harm others.

Not only will it do no harm to others,

But the sage himself will also be protected.

They do not hurt each other,

And the Virtue in each one refreshes both.

Ruling a large state resembles frying a small fish

(It is inappropriate to turn it over frequently).

When the Tao prevails in the world,

Even ghosts and spirits become harmless.

It is not that ghosts become harmless

But that their potencies can no longer harm people.

Not only ghosts become harmless,

Sages harm no people either.

Hence neither does any harm to the people

And both sages and ghosts help the people to enjoy the benefit of virtue.

Governing a large state

Is like boiling a small fish.

When you rule all under Heaven according to Tao,

The spirits of the dead cease to exercise supernatural power.

It is not that they cease to exercise supernatural power.

Their supernatural power does not harm the people.

It is not simply that their supernatural power does not harm the people.

The sage, too, does not harm the people.

Since neither of them harms the people,

Their Te, united, returns.

Governing a big country is akin to frying a small fish.

When the power of Dao is prevalent,

Even the demons become impotent.

Although the demons continue to possess magical power,

Their power is rendered innocuous.

Hence, the demons cannot harm people.

The sage also does not harm people.

Both do not interfere with people.

Thus by sticking to non-intervention, both let their virtues merge together.

Maintaining One's Position

Chu Wei

Ruling a big country is like frying a little fish.

When Tao is made to prevail in the world,

Evil spirits will lose their supernal power.

Not that they lose their supernal power,

But rather that the supernal power does no harm to people.

Not only the supernal power does no harm to people,

The Sage (Ruler) also will do no harm.

As both do not mutually cause any harm,

Virtue reverts to all parties respectively.

Rule a great kingdom as you would cook a small fish - gently!

If the Tao ruled in the world, evil spirits would not work their malignant powers.

Not that the evil spirits would lsoe their powers;

No! But their powers could do no harm to men.

They would do no harm;

Nor would the Sage harm himself by callin gon his spirits to do the people harm.

Therefore. Since neither of them harmed the other,

Their powers would unite in a common cause.

Rule a big country

As you would cook a small fish.

When beneath-heaven is ruled with Tao,

Demons don't go spiriting.

Not only do the demons not spirit,

But spirits don't harm people.

Not only do the spirits do no harm,

But the sage also does no harm.

Since both do no harm,

Virtue is restored intact.

Managing a big country is like cooking small fish.

The more you stir them, the less their shape can be maintained.

When one applies the subtle Way of the universe to the world,

all high spirits unite and harmonize their potencies.

Thus, they do not harm people.

All the world's leaders know to merge with the great Oneness,

thus all people are preserved from harm.

When the subtle Way of the universe is all pervading,

there is no longer any distinction between subject and object,

between spiritual and material,

between holy and unholy.

All energies merge into harmonious Oneness.

LX.

Occupying
the Throne

Rule
a great state in the way one would fry little fish,

Without
gutting or scraping, consider the good of the whole,

Let
the empire be ruled in accord with the rule of the Tao

And
the spirits of those who are gone will not seek to control.

Not
only not seek, but spirits will harm not the people,

Not
only not harm, but, because of the mle of the sage,

Who
harms not, these twain, not seeking to injure each other,

Will
therefore in virtue together unite and engage.

Govern a Great State

As you would cook a small fish (do it gently).

When Tao is manifest in the world

Evil spirits have no power.

When evil spirits have no power

They cannot hurt men.

Evil spirits cannot hurt men.

The self-controlled man does not hurt men.

The Master also does not hurt men.

Therefore they unite in manifesting Teh.

Ruling a big kingdom

is like cooking

a small fish.

( You have to be

careful not to burn it.)

When a person of

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

rules over the world,

demons have

no spiritual powers.

Not that the demons

have no spiritual powers,

but the spirits themselves

do no harm to humans.

Not that the spirits

do no harm to humans,

but the Complete Thinker

does no harm to the people.

If only

the leader and

people

would stop

from hurting

each other,

all the good things

of life

would

get together

in the kingdom.

Ruling a great state is like cooking a small fish.

If one governs All-under-heaven according to the Way, the manes (of the dead) will not manifest themselves as spirits. It is not that these manes are not spirits, but these spirits will not harm men. Just as the spirits will not harm men, the Saint will not harm the people.

If indeed these two do not harm one another, their Virtue will converge towards a common end.

Governing a great state is like cooking small fish.

Let
the kingdom be governed according to the Tao, and the manes of

the departed will not manifest their spiritual energy. It is not that

those manes have not that spiritual energy, but it will not be

employed to hurt men. It is not that it could not hurt men, but

neither does the ruling sage hurt them.

When
these two do not injuriously affect each other, their good

influences converge in the virtue (of the Tao).

Properly ruling a big kingdom is like cooking a small fish.

If
one oversees all under heaven in partnership with THOU,
'monsters' do not
exist.
Not only that, but
their 'existance' could not harm anyone!

Not only could they not harm anyone,
but the ruling Sage does them no harm
either.
Now,
when neither scorches the other,
merit in nourished in both: (and the fish
is DONE!)

It's
best to lead a large domain

As you would cook a little fish

Don't poke and prod or you are bound

To spoil the country and the dish

Just
stay open and aware

And evil cannot get a hold

Cannot find a home in you

Even evil's not that bold

At
center you harm no one

And no one's able to harm you

This kind of reciprocity

Creates the world anew

RULING a big kingdom is like cooking a small fish.

When a man of Tao reigns over the world, demons

have no spiritual powers. Not that the demons have no

spiritual powers, but the spirits themselves do no harm

to men. Not that the spirits do no harm to men, but the

Sage himself does no harm to his people. If only the

ruler and his people would refrain from harming each

other, all the benefits of life would accumulate in the

kingdom.

Govern a large country in the same way you would cook a small fish; you must be delicate.

Let the spirit of the Tao govern the land, and evil spirits will have no power.

Not that the evil spirits will depart, but the effects they have on the people will be insignificant,

and the effects of the Sage on the people will also not be burdensome.

Since the spirits and the Sage do not cause harm, all will be in balance.

Governing a large country

is like frying small fish.

Too much poking spoils the meat.

When
the Tao is used to govern the world

then evil will lose its power to harm the people.

Not that evil will no longer exist,

but only because it has lost its power.

Just as evil can lose its ability to harm,

the Master shuns the use of violence.

If
you give evil nothing to oppose,

then virtue will return by itself.

Run the group delicately, as if you were cooking small fish.

As much as possible, allow the group process to emerge naturally. Resist any temptation to instigate issues or elicit emotions which have not appeared on their own.

If you stir things up, you will release forces before their time and under unwarranted pressure. They may be emotions that belong to other people or places. They may be unspecific or chaotic energies, which in response to your pressure, strike out and hit any available target.

These forces are real and exist within the group. But do not push. Allow them to come out when they are ready.

When hidden issues and emotions emerge naturally, they resolve themselves naturally. They are not harmful. In fact, they are no different from any other thoughts or feelings.

All energies naturally arise, take form, grow strong, come to a new resolution, and finally pass away.

Govern a big country as you would fry a smal fish.

Approach the world with the Tao and evi will have no power.

Not that evi has no power, but it will not harm people.

Not that evi is not harmful,

But the Sage is dedicated to not harming people-even evi people.

When no one hurts another,

All will eventually return to the good.

Ruling
a country is like cooking a small fish.

If you forget your oneness with the fish,

you become confused in what you are

doing.

See
the world as one with Infinity

and evil will be impotent.

Not
that evil does not exist,

but because it is not distinguished

people harmonize with it.

If
all of humanity is in harmony with the

oneness of Infinity,

not only will evil not confuse the people,

the sage himself will not confuse the people.

They
will not confuse each other

and the oneness in each will harmonize

both.

Rule a great country as you would prepare delicacies.

Attain the Way under Heaven,

and its Demons will have no power.

Not that its Demons will have no power,

but rather their power will not harm men.

Not that their power will not harm men;

wise Men also will not harm men.

Neither will inflict harm.

Therefore Virtue will return.

Ruling a large country is like cooking a small fish.1

When the empire is ruled in accord with Tao,

The evil spirits will lose their power.

Not that the evil spirits will lose their powersentirely,

But they will not do any harm to anyone.

Not only do the evil spirits do no harm,

Neither does the Sage.

Since neither these two powers2 do any harm to the people,

Virtue is accumulated as they unite in their effect.3

1. i.e. the fish is spoilt if the cook disturbs it or is too hasty. (See Wang Pi's commentary (in P. J. Lin 1977, 122.) Lau points out (1963, 76) that a small fish is spoilt simply by handling it.

2. i.e. the Sage, and the evil spirits.

3. See Wang Pi's commentary in P. J. Lin 1977, 112–13.

Governing a big country is like cooking small fish:

Too much stirring will spoil the whole dish.

If the ruler governs the country by the Way,

The evil souls will not work against the society.

It is not that evil souls will have lost their influence,

But that their influence can do no harm to the living.

When evil souls can exert no bad influence from below,

Nor rulers harm people from above,

Then the Way will have extended far enough

To bring all the living back to their nature.

Governing a large state is like cooking a small fish.

Rule the world by Tao then ghosts will not take to haunting.

It is not that the ghosts will not haunt their haunting will cause no hurt to humankind. (It's not only that their haunting will not hurt humankind, the Wise Person also does not cause hurt to them.

These two do not hurt each other.) Yes, Te unifies and restores.

The activity of Tao and Te in relation to numerous individual souls of different age can be likened to cooking a meal of many ingredients in a large cauldron.

For realization of the destinies of most people which they deserved, Tao and Te use spirits; some of these spirit may be of low level of development.

Yet if man approaches Tao by the quality of the soul, he goes beyond the sphere of influence of such spirits.

A country is managed with great care.

When a country is managed with wisdom

The evil forces are weak.

Thus people won't feed the evil.

The Wise Person and his entourage

Do maintain the good among themselves.

In all they do the Virtue is present

Thus the world is continuous improved.

Regulating
a large country is like boiling small fish. When the Dao is used to oversee
the world, then its negative (contractive) forces of nature will not act as
positive (expansive) forces. Not [only] will its negative (contractive) forces
not become positive (expansive) forces, [even] its spirits will not (pierce
=) injure humans. Not [only] will its spirits not injure humans, [even] extraordinarily
talented humans will not injure people. Now when these two do not injure each
other, then virtuous interaction will return thereto.

To rule a large nation is as to cook a small fish.

In a world with Tao prevailing,

Ghosts will not become goblins.

Not that ghosts will not become goblins,

But God will not hurt the people;

Not that God will not hurt the people,

But the Sage will not hurt them either.

When both will not hurt each other,

All virtue will converge to them.

Holding the Position

Leading a large organization is like cooking a small fish.

If the Tao is present in the world,

The cunning are not mysterious.

Not only are the cunning not mysterious,

Their mystery does not harm others.

Not only does their mystery not harm others,

The Evolved also do not harm others.

Since together they do no harm,

The Power returns and accumulates.

Lead and live in union with the Dao and evil has no room. When there are no enemies there will be plenty of food for everyone.

Rule a large country

As small fish are cooked.

The
evil spirits of the world

Lose sanction as divinities

When government proceeds

According to the Way;

But even if they do not lose

Their ghostly countenance and right,

The people take no harm from them;

And if the spirits cannot hurt the folk,

The Wise Man surely does no hurt to them.

Since
then the Wise Man and the people

Harm each other not at all,

Their several virtues should converge.

Governing a great state is like frying a small fish (so frequent disturbance should be avoided).

Applying Tao to the kingdom can render ghosts harmless.

It is not that ghosts cannot function,

But that the function cannot harm men,

It is not that the function cannot harm men,

But that the sage never harms men at all.

So, men and ghosts will not harm each other,

Therefore both (men and ghosts) praise the De of the sage.

Ruling a large state is like cooking a small fish.

If one uses the Dao to oversee all under Heaven, the malign spirits there will lose their numinous power.

It is not that these malign spirits have no numinous power;

it is just that they will do no harm to the people.

It is not these numinous powers that do not harm the people but the sage, in fact, who does not harm the people.

It is because neither of these two cause any harm that they unite their virtues and revert to it.

1. Ruling a large state is like cooking small fish.

2.
When you use the Way to govern the world, evil spirits won't have godlike power.

3. Actually, it's not that evil spirits won't have godlike power,

4. It's that their power will not harm men.

5. But it's not [just] that their power won't harm men,

6. The Sage, also, will not harm them.

7. Since these two do not harm others,

8. Therefore their Virtues intermingle and return to them.

Being a leader

is like cooking a small fish;

get right with Tao,

and it's quick and easy.

When you're
in touch with Tao,

you don't need to worry

about misfortune.

You can't make it go away, of course,

but you can keep it

from harming other people.

Also, as a wise
leader,

you cause no harm to others,

so people won't have to worry

about getting hurt,

and they'll take the opportunity

to do the right thing.

.

Spirits

Leading a large country is like cooking a small fish.

When the world is led in accord with the Way,

spirits lose their powers.

It is not that they lose their powers,

but that their powers no longer harm people.

Not only do the spirits not harm people,

but the wise also do not harm people.

Not harming each other, spiritual power grows.

One should rule a country as one prepares a meal: with wisdom.

The more willingly one lets Tao do the less things are mismanaged and spoilt.

The less management the less pressure of forces.

The less forces are pressing the less trouble counter-pressure and resistance there are.

A sage does not press therefore he produces harmony and unity.

Governing A Great State

Lao Tze says,

Governing a great state is like cooking small fish.

The king of men knows to pacify his kingdom by using the Tao;

the dead men's ghosts will not manifest their spiritual energy.

Not only will those ghosts not manifest their spiritual energy, but they will not hurt men.

Not only will they hurt men, even the sage in exercise of his government will not disturb those ghosts.

As these two do not injuriously affect each other, so in the Tao's attribute, the living and the departed both find their rest places.

RULING

To
rule a country,

one must act with care,

as when frying the smallest fish.

If
actions are approached,

and carried out in the natural way,

the power of evil is reduced,

and so the ruler and the ruled

are equally protected.

They will not contrive to harm each other,

for the virtue of one refreshes the other.

Governing a large country

is like frying a small fish.

You spoil it with too much poking.

Center your country in the Tao

and evil will have no power.

Not that it isn't there,

but you'll be able to step out of its way.

Give evil nothing to oppose

and it will disappear by itself.

To rule a big country should be so simple like cooking small fish.

When the world rule is approaching Dao:

The Ghost and Spirit will not necessarily be divine.

It is not that the Ghost and Spirit will not necessarily be divine but the divine will not be utilized to threaten people with harm.

Not only the divine should not threaten people with harm, the Sage ruler should not threaten people with harm either.

When those two (state and religion) do no harm to each other, both will achieve the same goal - Return to Nature.

Governing a large country is like cooking a small fish.

If Tao is utilized to manage the society, its ghost will not become spirit.

Not that ghost is not spiritual, but that the spirit harms no people;

Not only does the spirit harm not the people, but that the sage is harmless.

As those two cause no harm, they are united in Action.

LX

Ruling
a large state is like cooking a small fish

When
you govern using the way power doesn't corrupt

It's not that power has no power over you

It's just that it's only used to give honor and respect to everyone

Where honor and respect are given, no one need do violence to get them

And each is allowed to master himself

Governing a Large Nation Is like Cooking Small Fry

Governing a large nation

is like cooking little fish.

When the world is ruled by the Way,

the ghosts are powerless.

It is not that the ghosts are powerless;

their spirits do not harm the people.

Not only do the spirits not harm the people;

sages do not harm the people either.

Because the two do not harm each other,

their virtues ultimately combine.

Governing a big kingdom is like cooking small seafood.

With Tao as guidance, evils will never have their way.

It is actually not that the evils do not have their way, but that the evils will not hurt people.

Not only do Evils not hurt people, but also do not hurt the sage.

When both people and the sage are not hurt, Te is in dominance.

Governing a big state is like cooking a small fish.

When a man of the Way reigns over the world, demons no longer have spiritual powers.

Not that the demons have no spiritual powers, but the spirits themselves do no harm to men.

Not that the spirits do no harm to men, but the sage himself does no harm to his people.

If the sage and his people refrain from harming each other, Virtue will return.

Ruling a big country is like cooking a small dish.

Ruling the world with Tao,

evil will have no spiritual power.

Not that evil is not a spirit,

but that spirit will not harm others.

Not only does evil spirit not harm others,

but the sage will also not harm others.

They both not harm others (or each other).

Their virtues return to Tao.

Governing a big country is like cooking a small fish.

Let
all under heaven be governed in accordance with the Tao,

and demons will not manifest their power.

It is not that they lack power

but rather they will not use their power

to harm the people.

They are not the only ones who have power

and do not use it to harm the people.

The True Person does not harm the people.

Whenever there is no harm done,

that power flows into the common Virtue.

Thinking
big thoughts

of religion the dao atheism

is like cooking small fish

the less handled

the more remains.

Following the way

no force is used no bad

no coaxing is used no good

both
merge

to the same end.

Ruling a big kingdom is like frying a small fish.

They who by dao ruled all that's under heaven did not let an evil spirit within
them display its powers. Such evil spirits did not display their supernatural
powers; the spirits of wise men were hardly used to hurt other men. So when
dao is employed to rule the kingdom, spiritual beings will lose their supernatural
grip and cease to harm common people. And their supernatural power will far
from harm people, and the wise man also will refrain from harming people. When
both don't do each other harm, virtue (power) flows towards them. If the sage's
good spirit is nowhere mobilised to harm other men, he himself can be saved
from [deterioration] harm.

And
so, if evil spirits and supermen don't harm each other, each can be quite saved
from harm. Furthermore, some of their "tall abilities" could converge. If so,
virtue can be accumulated in both for ulterior benefit or towards some common
[soap opera] end.

Ruling a big kingdom is like cooking a small fish.

If one oversees all under heaven in accord with the Way, demons have no spirit.

It is not that the demons have no spirit, but that their spirits do not harm people.

It is not merely that their spirits do not harm people, but that the sage also does not harm them.

Now,

When neither harms the other, integrity accrues to both.

The state should be governed as we cook small fish, without much business.

Bringing the Tao to the governing of the Kingdom will give rest to the shades of the dead.

Not that the Spirits will be inactive, but they will cease to trouble the people.

But what is of more importance, the wise ruler of the people will not hurt them.

And in so far as they do not interfere with one another, their influences conspire to the general good!

Keep Your Perspective

Nurturing your love

is like tending a small garden.

If you keep pulling up the plants

to see if the roots are growing

you will harvest nothing.

If you focus on your troubles

you give them added power.

Step aside as would a martial arts master.

The troubles still exist,

but you are not unbalanced by their blows.

They lose their power to disturb.

They become food for growth.

Scrutinizing every detail of your relationship

searching for hidden motives and meanings

will drive you both crazy.

Remember the many things that bring balance

to your life together:

the touches, caresses, smiles and kindnesses.

Take walks.

Share simple intimate meals.

And wash each other's hair

in the bath by candlelight.

These will keep your perspective clear.

Ruling a big country is like cooking a small fish.

If Tao is employed to rule the empire, Spiritual beings will lose their supernatural power.

Not that they lose their spiritual power, But their spiritual power
can no longer harm people. Not only will their supernatural power not
harm people, But the sage also will not harm people.

When both do not harm each other, Virtue will be accumulated in both for the benefit (of the people).

Handle a large
kingdom with as gentle a touch as if you were cooking small fish.

If you manage people by letting them alone,

Ghosts of the dead shall not haunt you.

Not that there are no ghosts

But that their influence becomes propitious

In the sound existence of a living man:

There is no difference between the quick and the dead,

They are one channel of vitality.

Governing a big country is like carefully cooking a small fish.

When the DAO rules, ghosts will not show their spirits.

Not only will the ghosts not show their spirits, but also the spirits will not hurt people.

Not only will the spirits not hurt people, but also the great men will not hurt people.

When neither the spirits nor the great men hurt people, the DE becomes natural and lasts long.

Governing a big country is like cooking a small fish.

The more you stir the pot, the less the fish stays intact.

If the world is guided by the Tao,

Even evil spirits are rendered spiritless.

Not that evil spirits are in themselves spiritless,

But their spirits do not harm people.

Not only do evil spirits not harm people,

But powerful rulers also do not harm people.

When no harm is done from either side,

Virtue accrues to both and all return to pristine oneness.

Governing a big country is like cooking small fish:

Too much stirring will spoil the whole dish.

If the ruler governs the country by the Way,

The evil souls will not work against the society.

It is not that evil souls will have lost their influence,

But that their influence can do no harm to the living.

When evil souls can exert no bad influence from below,

Nor rulers harm people from above,

Then the Way will have extended far enough

To bring all the living back to their nature.

Govern a large country in the same way you would cook a small fish; you must be delicate.

Let the spirit of the Tao govern the land, and evil spirits will have no power.

Not that the evil spirits will depart, but the effects they have on the people will be insignificant,

and the effects of the Sage on the people will also not be burdensome.

Since the spirits and the Sage do not cause harm, all will be in balance.

