===== Chapter 8 =====

The highest good is like unto water.

Water is good at benefiting the ten-thousand things

And does not contend.

It dwells in the places the masses of people detest—

For which reason a few compare [it] with the Tao.

Dwellings are perfected by the earth.

The heart is perfected by depth.

Giving is perfected by benevolence.

Speaking is perfected by sincerity.

Uprightness is perfected by governance.

Function is perfected by ability.

Change is perfected by time.

Only because one does not contend

Is the reason one is without reproach.

Best to be like water, Which benefits the ten thousand things And does
not contend. It pools where humans disdain to dwell, Close to the Tao.

Live in a good place. Keep your mind deep. Treat others well. Stand by your word.

Make fair rules. Do the right thing. Work when it's time.

Only do not contend, And you will not go wrong.

The highest good is like water.

Water benefits the myriad things and does not contend.

It flows to the low places that people disdain.

Therefore it becomes like Tao.

The value of a house is in its location.

The value of a mind - in the clarity of thought.

The value of companionship - in kindness.

The value of words - in truthfulness.

The value of governing - in justice.

The value of a doing a job - in effectiveness.

The value of taking an action - in timeliness.

If there's no contention, there is no blame.

WATERCOURSE WAY

The highest good of mankind, is like water -

- Without competition, gives Life to All Things.

- Flowing, it seeks and dwells in places rejected by mankind.

Thus it approaches close to the Tao.

Accordingly, the Sage -

- In dwelling, Seeks closeness to the earth.

- In heart, Seeks that which is profound.

- In relationships, Seeks gentleness and kindness.

- In speech, Seeks sincerity and truthfulness.

- In government, Seeks justice, order and peace.

- In business, Seeks ability and competence.

- In movement and action, Seeks timeliness.

The Sage -

Remaining free from competition and contention,

Is without blame - beyond reproach.

Supreme goodness follows the natural laws of the earth like water.

This goodness benefits the ten-thousand things (everything), yet it does not struggle.

It rejects the lowest place that people go.

This is why nature can be compared with the Tao.

The Earth is a good place to live with its profound good heart.

It is best to deal with others humanely.

Sincere speech is best.

A just government is best.

Competent service to others is best.

There is a proper timing for best actions.

The masters do not compete, therefore they will be without fault.

THE NATURE OF PEACE

Admire thou the High Way of Water! Is not Water the soul of the life of

things, whereby they change? Yet it seeketh its level, and abideth

content in obscurity. So also it resembleth the Tao, in this Way

thereof!

The
virtue of a house is to be well-placed; of the mind, to be at ease in

silence as of Space; of societies, to be well-disposed; of governments,

to maintain quietude; of work, to be skillfully performed; and of all

motion, to be made at the right time.

Also
it is the virtue of a man to abide in his place without discontent;

thus offendeth he no man.

Generosity is like the Waters. It is a balm to all beings and rejectsnone. It dwells in places shunned by the masses, and therefore close tothe Spirit. Generosity seeks out in dwellings the humble, in thinking depth,in giving love, in speaking truth, in ruling justice, in work knowledgein all our deeds the proper time. Generosity does not reject and thereforewill not be rejected.

A perfect human being is like the water

That benefits all things and competes with nothing

It stays in places which others despise

But in this way it follows its origin

In his heart the wise cherishes simplicity

In contact with others he is amiable

In his words he is reliable

In his leading he is peaceful

In what he does he is competent

He does everything at the moment it needs to be done

He won't fight

And therefore he is impeccable

The best way to conduct oneself may be observed in the behaviour of water. Water is useful to every living thing, yet it does not demand pay in return for its services; it does not even require that it be recognized, esteemed, or appreciated for its benefits. This illustrates how intelligent behaviour so closely approximates the behaviour of Nature itself.

If experience teaches that houses should be built close to the ground, That friendship should be based on sympathy and good will,

That good government employs peaceful means of regulation, That business is more successful if it employs efficient methods, That wise behaviour adapts itself appropriately to the particular circumstances, All this is because these are the easiest ways.

If one proceeds naturally, without ambition or envy, everything works out for the best.

The highest good is like that of water.

The goodness of is that it benefits the ten thousand creatures;

Yet itself does not scramble,

But is content with the places that all men disdain.

It is this makes water so near to the Way.

And if men think the ground the best place for building a house upon,

If among thoughts they value those that are profound,

If in friendship they value gentleness,

In words, truth; in government, good order;

In deeds, effectiveness; in actions, timeliness -

In each case it is because they prefer what does not lead to strife,

And therefore does not go amiss.

Supreme virtue is like water.

It nourishes the ten thousand things without effort

and flows in places men shun.

It is like Tao.

Stand on solid ground.

Go deep into the heart.

Speak only what is true.

In friendship, be kind.

In governing, be just.

In enterprise, be able.

In action, watch the timing.

Do not contend with nature and nothing will go wrong.

The highest good is like water

Water's goodness benefits the myriad beings

And yet does not strive

Dwells in places which everyone else regards with contempt

And in this way is close to the way

In dwelling the good is place

In mind the good is depth

In relations the good is compassion

In speech the good is sincerity

In government the good is organization

In business the good is competence

In movement the good is timing

It is only when there is no contention

That there then is no resentment

Intimacy

The highest good is like water.

Water give life to the ten thousand things and yet does not compete with them.

It flows in places that the mass of people detest

and therefore is it close to the Way

In dwelling, the good thing is the land.

In the mind, the good thing is depth.

In giving, the good thing is being like Heaven.

In speeking, the good thing is sincerity.

In ruling, the good thing is order.

In affairs, the good thing is ability.

In action, the good thing is timeliness.

It is only because it does not compete,

that therefore it is without fault.

The highest good is like water which benefits all things and contends with none. it flows in low places that others disdain and thus it is close to the Tao.

In living, choose your ground well. In thought, stay deep in the heart. In relationships, be generous. In speaking, hold to the truth.

In leadership, be organized. In work, do your best. In action, be timely.

If you compete with no one, no one can compete with you.

Like water is the Cosmic Consciousness:

It nourishes the depths of everything that lives.

It flows, it settles, it abides in low places.

Keep your home close to the earth,

Keep your thoughts direct and simple,

Keep judgment fair, and fluid in conflict,

Keep your government free of power,

And your personal affairs in harmony

With the life of Nature.

Drop the struggle, silence the demons,

And your natural self will be free.

Following Tao is not about adopting an attitude of passivity, but nurturing inner strength instead. The superficial or populist interpretation of the so-called Taoist philosophy often invokes the phrase "go with the flow," in the sense of passive acceptance of injustice or encroachment. But with the phrase, "silence the demons," Lao Tzu reminds us that we are not meant to "go with the flow," for that is the stuff of inner weakness. He would encourage us to act with inner determination in this respect: to silence demons, both our own and those of others, through the fluid, invisible work of inner action. Water does its work with persistent strength but no effort; and thus it is effective. Even where it appears turbid, it nourishes, settles, flows, and acts. The same is true of the person in harmony with Cosmic Principles: he can speak simply and briefly, yet make his point clear; he can live "close to the earth" in wonderful abundance; he can remain poised amid conflict, but without bowing to power or resorting to manipulation. Water doesn't try to carve canyons or wear down mountains; it just does it. Its action occurs at an invisible and quantum plane of being. This is how transformation happens, and it is how it can happen through us as well: when we "nourish our depths" and "silence our demons," the natural self that arises is the same kind of quantum actor as the water that shapes and sustains ourselves and our planet. It has the unique ability to transform conflict into understanding, and bring us fulfillment and completion in every aspect of our lives. This is because its unforced action engages the helping presences of the Tao—the force of Nature that make things happen, and endure. These presences are what the I Ching calls "Helpers."

The highest motive is to be like water.

Water is essential to all life,

yet it does not demand a fee

or proclaim its importance.

Rather, it flows humbly to the lowest level,

and in so doing it is much like Tao.

In
the home the truly wise love the humble earth,

the foundation on which the home is built.

In the heart they love what is genuine.

In friendship they are compassionate.

In words they are sincere.

In government they foster peace and goodwill.

In business they work with quiet efficiency.

Serenity
is the goal of Tao.

Through it nothing is lost.

The highest goodness resembles water. Water greatly benefits all things, but does not assert itself.

He approximates to the Tao, who abides by that which men despise.

He revolutionizes the place in which he dwells; his depth is immeasurable; he strengthens moral qualities by what he bestows; he augments sincerity by what he says; he evokes peace by his administration; his transactions manifest ability, he is opportune in all his movements.

Forasmuch as he does not assert himself he is free from blame.

The highest goodness is like water. Water is beneficent to all things but does not contend. It stays in places which others despise. Therefore it is near Tao.

In dwelling, think it a good place to live; In feeling, make the heart deep; In friendship, keep on good terms with men; In words, have confidence;

In ruling, abide by good order; In business, take things easy; In motion, make use of the opportunity.

Since there is no contention, there is no blame.

The Worth of Water

Higher worth is like water.

Water is good at benefiting the ten-thousand natural kinds

Without wrangling for position.

What the crowd despises

Hence close to the guide.

In dwelling value the earth.

In heart-mind value depth.

In being-with value kindness.

In words value reliability.

In rectifying value order.

In social affairs value ability.

In action value timing.

In general, simply don't wrangle

Hence have no indiscretion.

That which is best is similar to the water.

Water profits ten thousand things and does not oppose them.

It is always at rest in humble places that people dislike.

Thus, it is close to Tao.

Therefore, for staying, we prefer a humble place.

For minds, we prefer profundity.

For companions, we prefer the kindness.

For words, we prefer sincerity.

For government, we prefer good order.

For affairs, we prefer ability.

For actions, we prefer the right time.

Because we do not strive,

We are free from fault.

The greatest good is like water: it benefits all life without being noticed.

It flows even to the lowliest places where no one chooses to be and so it is very close to the Tao.

It settles only in quiet locations.

Its deepest heart is always clear.

It offers itself with great goodness.

It keeps its rhythm as it keeps its promises.

It governs tributaries as it governs its people.

It adapts to all necessities.

It moves at the right moment.

It never flaunts its goodness and so it never attracts any blame.

The supreme good man is like water.

Water is good at benefiting

The ten thousand things without contending,

Lying where the multitude loathes to:

Therefore, close to the Tao.

In habitation,

He is good at choosing the place;

In mind,

Good at profundity;

In giving,

Good at imitating heaven;

In speech,

Good at honesty;

In government,

Good at bringing order;

In duties,

Good at exerting his ability;

In making moves,

Good at timeliness.

Being uncontentious,

There is no resentment.

The best of the best is like water.

Water is beneficial to everything,

And does not demand anything for itself in return.

Water stays in places where nothing else stays.

Therefore, water is close to Tao.

At home, it is important for this to be a good place to live in.

In feeling, examine the depths of your heart.

In friendship, maintain good relations with others.

In words, have confidence.

In government, abide by good order.

In trade, taking things easy will be to your benefit.

In movement, use every opportunity.

Since there is no demand for anything, there is no blame, either.

This shows how the sage, the highest level of good, operates selflessly.

He does good for others but demands nothing of them.

He is satisfied with everything.

He does not covet anything that belongs to someone else.

When he serves as an example for us, the world enjoys peace and tranquillity.

Highest good is like water.

Because water excels in benefiting the myriad creatures without contending with
them and settles where none would like to be, it comes close to the way.

In
a home it is the site that matters;

In quality of mind it is depth that matters;

In an ally it is benevolence that matters;

In speech it is good faith that matters;

In government it is order that matters;

In affairs it is ability that matters;

In action it is timeliness that matters.

It
is because it does not contend that it is never at fault.

Easy By Nature

Superior goodness resembleth water. The water's goodness benefiteth the ten thousand things, yet it quarreleth not.

Water dwelleth in the places which the multitudes of men shun; therefore it is near unto the eternal Reason

The dwelling of goodness is in lowliness. The heart of goodness is in commotion. When giving, goodness showeth benevolence. In words, goodness keepeth faith. In government goodness standeth for order. In business goodness exhibiteth ability. The movements of goodness keep time.

It quarreleth not. Therefore it is not rebuked.

To be truly good, be like water which benefits all without knowing. Men who aspire to ascend benefit no being. But all are benefited by the natural descent of water. This is like the Tao. So seek a dwelling for shelter. Think when the need arises. When you deal with others, do so with compassion. When you speak to others, don't lie. Work at a profession for self-refinement as well as livelihood. Lead your family by simply following them. When you follow the natural path no mistake can be made.

Goodness at its best is like water.

Water benefits myriad matters but is not in competition with them.

Water stays at a level disliked by others, as if it were the Direction.

Wherever [the sage] stays, it is a good place;

whatever [the sage] thinks, it is good thought;

whomever [the sage] contacts, it is nobleness;

whatever [the sage] expresses, it is truthfulness;

however [the sage] governs, it is good administration;

whatever [the sage] does, it is good deed;

whenever [the sage] acts, it is timely action.

Being not in competition, [the sage] has no concern.

Lofty nobility is like water.

Water's nobility is to enrich the ten thousand things

and yet never strive:

it just settles through places people everywhere loathe.

Therefore, it's nearly Way.

Dwelling's nobility is earth,

mind's nobility is empty depth,

giving's nobility is Humanity,

word's nobility is sincerity,

government's nobility is accord,

endeavor's nobility is ability,

action's nobility is timing.

When you never strive you never go wrong.

The ultimate good is like water.

Water benefits all things without competing with them.

It stays at places where all people disdain,

Therefore it is close to Tao.

A habitat is good because of its location;

A mind is good because of its profundity;

A friend is good because of his kindness;

A statement is good because of its credibility;

A government is good because of its excellent management;

A worker is good because of his productivity; and

A move is good because of its timeliness.

Only by being not contentious,

Will there be no ill will.

Better
value looks like water

The
value if water profits the 10000 things yet without contending

It dwells in places the collective mind dislikes-

So it is severed, relating to tao.

The
value of a home is in location

The value of a mind is in breadth

The value of a relationship is in humanity

The value of a word is in belief

The value of a government is in governing

The value of an effort is in ability

The value of a movement is in time.

In
the end only be without contending

So be absent from reproach.

Transcendent goodness is like water. Water likes to do good to all beings; it does not struggle for any definite form or position, but puts itself in the lowest places that no one wants. By this, it is the reflection of the Principle.

From its example, those who imitate the Principle, lower themselves, sink themselves. They are benevolent, sincere, regulated, efficacious, and they conform themselves to the times.

They do not struggle for their own interest, but yield. Therefore they do not suffer and contradiction.

The highest goodness resembles water

Water greatly benefits myriad things without contention

It stays in places that people dislike

Therefore it is similar to the Tao

Dwelling at the right place

Heart with great depth

Giving with great kindness

Words with great integrity

Governing with great administration

Handling with great capability

Moving with great timing

Because it does not contend

It is therefore beyond reproach

Water is the most fitting metaphor for the Tao and the nature of sages who follow the Tao. Water nourishes plants and slakes the thirst of animals. Water also assumes the lowest position it can no matter where it happens to be. These observations reveal to us characteristics of both the Tao and the sages.

Water flows to the lowest place not because it intentionally does so, but because it follows its own nature. The sages, like water, also place themselves lower, not because they contrive to do so, but because it is their nature to be humble.

Sages have depth of character. Like a deep body of water, sages are tranquil and composed. A pool of water is not only the surface but also everything below it. Likewise, there is more to a sage than meets the eyes. It may take a while for people to realize this, but the more they get to know the sage, the more they discover.

Water provides its benefits and moves on, without waiting for any benefits in return. Sages benefit others in the exact same way. They give only to give, not because they want recognition or payback. When they provide teachings, assistance or guidance, they do so with no conditions, no strings attached, and no expectations.

Water reflects its surroundings. It does not try to hide or change anything in its reflections. When sages speak, it is with this same sense of integrity and sincerity. People come to trust the sage, because they realize the sage will give them the truth when no one else will.

Water administers to everything equally. Water plays no favorites. It slakes the thirst of the kind person just as it does the unkind person. Taking a cue from this, sages also do not pick and choose the recipients of the benefits they provide. Their impartial administration is conducted without bias and judgment.

Water is versatile. It conforms to the shape of any container to do its work. Following this, the sages also cultivate flexibility and adaptability in themselves. Because the world is constantly changing, they also make constant adjustments to handle new challenges.

Water moves in accordance with Heaven. Whether it takes the form of rain, snow, or hail, water follows the timing of natural events. The sages are the same way. They live each day following the natural flow of events, and take appropriate actions at the appropriate time.

Most importantly, water does not contend. It gives itself to everything without complaints or protests. Like water, sages do not engage in petty squabbles, because their only wish is to be of service. They are at peace with everyone, and that makes them beyond reproach.

Notes

Quick summary of this chapter - Tao cultivators observe water in order to emulate the following characteristics:

Natural humility.

Depth of character.

Giving without expectations.

Sincerity and integrity.

Equal administration.

Versatility and adaptability.

Natural timing.

Non-contention.

True goodness is like water, in that it benefits everything and harms nothing. Like water it ever seeks the lowest place, the place that all others avoid. It is closely kin to the Tao.

For a dwelling it chooses the quiet meadow; for a heart the circling eddy. In generosity it is kind; in speech it is sincere; in authority it is order; in affairs it is ability; in movement it is rhythm.

Inasmuch as it is always peaceable it is never rebuked.

A person with superior goodness (shan) is like water,

Water is good in benefiting (li) all beings,

Without contending (cheng) with any.

Situated in places shunned (o) by many others,

Thereby it is near (chi) Tao.

(Such a person's) dwelling is the good earth,

(His/her) mind (hsin) is the good deep water (yuan),

(His/her) associates are good kind people (jen),

(His/her) speech shows good trust (hsin),

(His/her) governing is the good order,

(His/her) projects (shih) are carried out by good talents (neng),

(His/her) activities (tung) are good in timing.

Because he does not contend (pu cheng) with any,

He commits no wrong.

The highest motive is to be like water: water is essential to all life, yet it does not demand a fee or proclaim its importance. Rather, it flows humbly to the lowest level, and in so doing it is much like Tao.

In the home the truly wise love the humble earth, the foundation on which the home is built; in the heart they love what is genuine; in friendship they are compassionate; in words they are sincere; in government they foster peace and good will; in business they work with quiet efficiency.

Serenity is the goal of Tao; through it nothing is lost.

It is good to be like water.

It nourishes without effort.

It flows without contention into low places that people scorn.

Thus, it is like the Tao.

In dwelling, live close to the land.

In thinking, go deep.

In relating to others, be gentle.

In governing, seek good order and justice.

In acting, be skillful.

In working, do all things at the right time.

No contention, no strife.

Eight

The highest good is like water.

Water give life to the ten thousand things and does not strive.

It flows in places men reject and so is like the Tao.

In dwelling, be close to the land.

In meditation, go deep in the heart.

In dealing with others, be gentle and kind.

In speech, be true.

In ruling, be just.

In daily life, be competent.

In action, be aware of the time and the season.

No
fight: No blame.

The perfect goodness is like water.

Water approaches all things instead of contending with them.

It prefers to dwell where no one would like to stay;

Hence it comes close to the Tao.

A man of perfect goodness chooses a low place to dwell as water,

He has a heart as deep as water,

He offers friendship as tender as water,

He speaks as sincerely as water,

He rules a state as orderly as water,

He does a thing as properly as water,

He takes action as timely as water.

Like water, he never contends with others,

So he never commits a mistake.

The supreme good is like water.

Water benefits the ten thousand things, yet contends with nothing.

It dwells where everyone is loath to be.

That is why it is near to Tao.

In dwelling, the good is the ground,

In thought, the good is depth,

In association, the good is gentleness,

In speech, the good is truthfulness,

In government, the good is order,

In work, the good is ability,

In movement, the good is timeliness.

Truly, because it [water] contends with nothing,

It is beyond reproach.

A person of great virtue behaves like water.

Water benefits everything but does not contend.

It resides at the lowest place that everyone loathes.

Thus this characteristic of water bears close resemblance to the typical trait of Dao.

A person of great virtue prefers to live on the lowest ground.

His heart is quiescent and serene.

His dealings with others are based on goodwill.

His utterances are forever sincere.

His rule is orderly and peaceful.

His managerial skills are superb.

His timing is always impeccable.

Because he is not contentious, nobody will ever hold a grudge against him.

Yielding Nature

I Hsing

A man of the superior type resembles water,

Whose goodness lies in benefiting all things without contention,

And staying in places detested by the masses.

This makes him closely akin to Tao.

The goodness of his abode is its low location.

The goodness of his heart is its cavern-like hollowness.

Benevolence is the goodness of his offerings.

Sincerity is the goodness of his speech.

The goodness of his rule means peace.

The goodness of his dealings means competence.

His moves are good because timely.

As he is not disposed to contend,

He causes little resentment.

The highest good may be likened to water.

Water benefits all creatures yet does not strive or argue with them.

It rests content in those lowly places which others despise:

Thus it is very near to the Tao.

It is a virtue in a house that it stands firm upon the ground.

It is a virtue in a man that his thoughts should be profound.

In friendship, gentleness and good nature are a virtue.

In speech, it is a virtue to utter truths.

It is a virtue in government that it maintains good order.

It is a virtue in afairs that they should be well-conducted.

It is a virtue in movements and actions that they should be well-timed.

And all these virtues are as the virtue of water,

Which does not contend and therefore can do no wrong.

True goodness is like water;

Water benefits the ten thousand things

But does not compete with them.

It stays in places disliked by man,

Therefore comes close to Tao.

For a dwelling keep to the ground.

In your heart keep to the deeps.

In dealing with others, keep to gentleness.

In speaking, keep to the truth.

In governing, keep to order.

In business, keep to efficiency.

In making moves, keep to the right pace.

If you do not compete,

You will not be faulted.

One of universal nature is like water;

he benefits all things but does not contend with them.

He unprotestingly takes the lowest position;

thus, he is close to the universal truth.

One of universal virtue chooses to live in a suitable environment.

He attunes his mind to become profound.

He deals with others with kindness.

In his speech, he is sincere.

His rule brings about order.

His work is efficient.

His actions are opportune.

One of deep virtue does not contend with people;

thus, he is above reproach.

VIII.

Harmony
with Nature

The
highest goodness that we know has water for its type,

It
benefits all things, yet ever flows

To the
spot which men disdain, the gutter and the plain,

And
so is near the Tao, its archetype.

A
residence is excellent according to its place,

A
heart for eddies passion never knows,

Generosity
for kindness, words for faithfulness,

A
government for order, business for its gain,

And
movements for their timeliness and grace.

As
the man of excellence does not quarrel for his place,

There are none to find fault with him for the
places which remain.

Heavenly Love is like water.

Water blesses all things,

It does not hurt them.

It loves the lowly place that men dislike,

Therefore it comes very near to Tao.

The Master loves to dwell upon the earth.

In his heart he loves Infinity,

In his benevolence he loves giving,

In his words he loves sincerity,

In his government he loves peace,

In his business affairs he loves ability,

In his movements he loves punctuality.

The Master, indeed, does not fight,

Therefore his Inner Life increases.

The
highest form of

goodness
is like water.

Water
knows how to

benefit
all things

without
contention.

It
flows to places

others
disdain.

It
comes near the Tao (the Laws of the Universe).

In
choosing your dwelling,

know
how to keep the ground.

In
cultivating your mind,

know
how to dive

in
the hidden depths.

In
dealing with others,

know
how to be

gentle
and kind.

Speak
within

trust.

In
governing,

know
how to

maintain
order.

In
transacting business,

know
how to

be
efficient.

In
making a move,

know
how to

choose
the right moment.

If
you

do
not contend,

none
contend

against
you.

The highest goodness is like water. The goodness of water consists in benefiting the ten thousand things without ever striving. It stays in the (lowest) place which all men loathe. Therefore it comes near to the Way.

What one values in a dwelling is the location;

What one values for the heart is depth;

What one values in human relations is humanity;

What one values in speaking is good faith;

What one values in ruling is good order;

What one values in serving others is ability;

What one values in action is timeliness.

Indeed, just because there is not striving, one may remain without blame.

The highest excellence is like (that of) water. The excellence

of water appears in its benefiting all things, and in its occupying,

without striving (to the contrary), the low place which all men

dislike. Hence (its way) is near to (that of) the Tao.

The
excellence of a residence is in (the suitability of) the place;

that of the mind is in abysmal stillness; that of associations is in

their being with the virtuous; that of government is in its securing

good order; that of (the conduct of) affairs is in its ability; and

that of (the initiation of) any movement is in its timeliness.

And
when (one with the highest excellence) does not wrangle (about

his low position), no one finds fault with him.

The Great Benevolence is like water;
it benefits the myriad things,
yet seeks to occupy the lowest places,
which are not wanted by the Egos of
the people.
Therefore
it is nearby to people like THOU.
The
Virtue of an abode is it's location.
The Virtue of the heart is it's depth.

The Virtue of giving lies in trusting others.
The Virtue of wise rule
is orderliness.
The Virtue of enterprise is skill.
The Virtue of action
is timing.
It
is precisely because one does not 'struggle' that there is no blame.

The
seer flows like water

Lying low along the way

Nourishing whatever comes

To be held on display

The
seer keeps to simple ways

And therefore is content

When joy or sorrow manifests

To give complete assent

If
you can clearly be yourself

And never rise to interfere

Everyone will cherish you

And always hold you dear

THE highest form of goodness is like water.

Water knows how to benefit all things without striving with them.

It stays in places loathed by all men.

Therefore, it comes near the Tao.

In choosing your dwelling, know how to keep to the ground.

In cultivating your mind, know how to dive in the hidden deeps.

In dealing with others, know how to be gentle and kind.

In speaking, know how to keep your words.

In governing, know how to maintain order.

In transacting business, know how to be efficient.

In making a move, know how to choose the right moment.

If you do not strive with others,

You will be free from blame.

The highest goodness is like water.

Water effortlessly benefits all things without struggling.

It is content to flow to the low places that people scorn.

In this way water is in accordance with the TAO.

Therefore:

In dwelling, live close to the Earth.

For the mind, depth should be sought.

In conflict, be fair and righteous.

In government, self-mastery, competence and timing is preferred.

The sage does not strive,

Therefore no one can strive against him.

The supreme good is like water,

which benefits all of creation

without trying to compete with it.

It gathers in unpopular places.

Thus it is like the Tao.

The
location makes the dwelling good.

Depth of understanding makes the mind good.

A kind heart makes the giving good.

Integrity makes the government good.

Accomplishment makes your labors good.

Proper timing makes a decision good.

Only
when there is no competition

will we all live in peace.

The wise leader is like water.

Consider water: water cleanses and refreshes all creatures without distinction and without judgement; water freely and fearlessly goes deep beneath the surface of things; water is fluid and responsive; water follows the law freely.

Consider the leader: the leader works in any setting without complaint, with any person or issue that comes on the floor; the leader acts so that all will benefit and serves well regardless of the rate of pay; the leader speaks simply and honestly and intervenes in order to shed light and create harmony.

From watching the movements of water, the leader has learned that in action, timing is everything.

Like water, the leader is yielding. Because the leader does not push, the group does not resent or resist.

The sagely person is like water

Water benefits All things and does not compete with them.

It gathers in unpopular places.

In this it is like the Tao.

In dwelling, live close to the Earth.

In thinking, be open to new ideas.

In relationships, be kind.

In speech, tel the truth and keep your word.

In leading people, demonstrate integrity.

In daily matters, be competent.

In acting, consider the appropriate timing.

If you do not try to prove yourself superior to others,

You will be beyond reproach.

Water
is like Infinity,

it gives itself to all things

without distinction or judgment

and settles into the lowest places

without deliberation.

In
dwelling, live in harmony with the land.

In meditation, remember your oneness with the

Infinite.

In dealing with others, do not judge.

In communicating, relate the truth.

In governing, be fair.

In daily life, be in harmony with all things

and at peace with all people.

In action, be mindful that there is a time

and a season for all things.

Avoid
judging and its legacy contention

and flow in the peace and harmony

of the oneness of humanity.

The greatest Good is like water.

The Goodness of Water benefits all things without struggle;

like Tao, choosing places men avoid.

A good dwelling has land.

A good mind is profound.

Good relations are benevolent.

Good speech is true.

Good leaders take charge.

Good actions are skillful.

Good movement is well timed.

Heaven alone is beyond dispute, and therefore blameless.

The superior man is like water.

Water benefits the Ten Thousand Things, but does not compete with them.

It stays in the places which people despise,

And thus is close to Tao.

For his dwelling he chooses good ground;

he has a mind that loves the profound;

is benevolent when dealing with others;

is sincere when he speaks;

preserves order when ruling;

shows competence in business;

and takes action at the proper time.

Because he does not compete, he is beyond reproach.

The perfect goodness is like the water.

Water benefits everything without caring for its own profit,

And lives in places that none would like.

As a good instance of the able Way,

Water is best at choosing places for its existence,

Freeing its mind for working up new wonders

Matching the heaven in generous grace

Speaking with the most persuasive power,

Governing supremely without verbalized policies

Crowning everything it does with success

And taking its actions at the best times.

For one who struggles for nothing

Will find no difficulty in everything.

The highest Excellence is like water. Water, Excellent at being of benefit to the thousands of things, does not contend - it settles in places everyone else avoids. Yes, it is just about Tao.

Excellence in a house: the ground "Excellence in a mind: depth Excellence in companions: Goodness Excellence in speaking: sincerity

Excellence in setting things right: good management Excellence on the job: ability Excellence in making a move: good timing."

Simply do not contend then there will be no fault.

The wise lives like water. Water serves all beings and does not require anything for itself. It exists below all things. In this respect, it is similar to Tao.

Life has to follow the principle of naturalness.

Follow the path of heart! Be friendly!

Tell only truth!

When guiding others, follow the principle of keeping calm!

Every action has to be realizable and done in time.

He who does not strive to be ahead of others can avoid many mistakes.

The virtue is like the water,

That gradually infiltrates all.

Similarly the virtue is very subtle

Because resides on the Way (Tao).

He
who searches for own place will find it.

The feelings make a deep heart.

Friendship brings good relationships with others.

The honest speech creates trust.

He who is a leader will follow the rules first.

In business fairness is essential.

The time will clarify things.

Thus the virtue (Te) acts without contradictions.

missing

The man of supreme goodness resembles water.

Water benefits all things

Without competing with them,

Staying in places that men despise;

Therefore, it is very close to Tao.

Dwelling in good places,

Having a heart that loves the profound,

Allying with benevolence,

Inviting trust with words,

Being righteous in governing,

Managing all things well,

Moving at the right time.

Just because he does not compete,

The man of supreme goodness frees himself of blame.

Noncompetitive Values

The highest value is like water.

The value in water benefits All Things,

And yet it does not contend.

It stays in places that others disdain,

And therefore is close to the Tao.

The value in a dwelling is location.

The value in a mind is depth.

The value in relations is benevolence.

The value in words is sincerity.

The value in leadership is order.

The value in work is competence.

The value in effort is timeliness.

Since, indeed, they do not contend,

There is no resentment.

Behind me are tall mountain peaks. Behind you is a valley river. The water makes its way from the sky to the peaks. The peaks to the river. Along its journey, a doe will sip from it. A tree will sink its roots into it. A murderer will wash the blood from his hands in it. The water does not care. This is like the Dao. Keep to the simple in thought, in work, in pleasure, in living. When you are content like the river, you will have admiration. But that does not matter.

The highest goodness, water-like,

Does good to everything and goes

Unmurmuring to places men despise;

But so, is close in nature to the Way.

If
the good of the house is from land,

Or the good of the mind is depth,

Or love is the virtue of friendship,

Or honesty blesses one's talk,

Or in government, goodness is order,

Or in business, skill is admired,

Or the worth of an act lies in timing,

Then peace is the goal of the Way

By which no one ever goes astray.

The highest good is like water.

Water is apt to benefit all things and does not compete with them.

It dwells in places people disdain.

Thus it is closest to Tao.

(The best man should be like water)

In his dwelling he is at ease with lowness,

In his heart he is profound,

He is sincere in his dealings with others,

He is faithful in speech,

He is orderly in government,

He is competent in deeds,

He is timely in action.

It is because he is not competitive that he is without any faults.

The highest good is like water.

The goodness of water lies in benefiting the myriad things without contention, while locating itself in places that common people scorn.

Therefore it is almost exactly like the Dao.

Goodness in position depends on location;

goodness in heart/mind depends on profundity;

goodness in association depends on benevolence;

goodness in words depends on sincerity;

goodness in government depends on order;

goodness in affairs depends on ability;

goodness in action depends on timeliness.

And it is only by avoiding contention that no blame occurs.

1. The highest good is like water;

2. Water is good at benefiting the ten thousand things and yet it [does not]
compete [with them].

3. It dwells in places the masses of people detest,

4. Therefore it is close to the Way.

5.
In dwelling, the good thing is the land;

6. In the mind, the good thing is depth;

7. In giving, the good thing is [being like] Heaven;

8. In speaking, the good thing is sincerity;

9. In governing, the good thing is order;

10. In affairs, the good thing is ability;

11. In activity, the good thing is timeliness.

12.
It is only because it does not compete, that therefore it is without fault.

"Doing
the right thing" is like water;

water is good for all living things.

It flows without thinking about where it's going

...just like Tao.

Keep your feet
on the ground.

Remember what's important.

Be there when people need you.

Say what you mean.

Be prepared for anything.

Do as much as you can, whenever it needs doing.

If you don't
compare yourself to others,

nobody can compare to you.

.

The Best Are Like Water

The best are like water.

Water benefits all things and does not compete with them.

It flows to the lowest level.

In this it comes near to the Way.

In their dwellings, they love the earth.

In their hearts, they love what is profound.

In their friendship, they love humanity.

In their words, they love sincerity.

In government, they love peace.

In business, they love ability.

In their actions, they love timeliness.

It is because they do not compete

that there is no resentment.

The Perfect Man is like water:

To all things it readily bestows refreshment and comfort.

Without struggle it fills the depths which man shuns and is closest to the Tao.

Likewise the Perfect Man:

Where he abides he gladly fills his place.

What he has in mind is fathomless goodness.

Where he gives he gives himself desireless.

When he speaks purest truth wells up.

Where he leads he guides through gentleness.

Where he acts he serves all and carries them to abundance.

Where he intervenes he causes balance and peace.

Because he adapts himself without struggle he lives without enmity and resistance.

On Water

Lao Tze says,

Ultimate goodness shall be found in water.

Water is good at helping all things, being free of conflict with them.

It stays in places that most people despise, so it is closest to the Tao.

It provides benefit wherever it stays,

illustrates the example of good men's hearts by forming the depth of the abyss,

distributes to the needy one to demonstrate benevolence,

reflects genuine images to interpret credibility,

removes dirty things to purify the government,

transforms to different shapes to display its capability,

moves as the seasons change to show timeliness.

Because water never competes with others, hence no one will resent it.

THE WAY OF WATER

Great
good is said to be like water,

sustaining life with no conscious striving,

flowing naturally, providing nourishment,

found even in places

which desiring man rejects.

In
this way

it is like the Tao itself.

Like
water, the sage abides in a humble place;

in meditation, without desire;

in thoughtfulness, he is profound,

and in his dealings, kind.

In speech, sincerity guides the man of Tao,

and as a leader, he is just.

In management, competence is his aim,

and he ensures the pacing is correct.

Because
he does not act for his own ends,

nor cause unnecessary conflict,

he is held to be correct

in his actions towards his fellow man.

The supreme good is like water,

which nourishes all things without trying to.

It is content with the low places that people disdain.

Thus it is like the Tao.

In dwelling, live close to the ground.

In thinking, keep to the simple.

In conflict, be fair and generous.

In governing, don't try to control.

In work, do what you enjoy.

In family life, be completely present.

When you are content to be simply yourself

and don't compare or compete,

everybody will respect you.

Perfect excellence is like gentle water.

Gentle water benefits All Things and yet it does not struggle.

Do away with what all people hate.

Thus this is approaching Dao.

Give to what is of perfect personnel.

Stay in a perfect place,

think in a perfect way,

cooperate with perfect people,

speak perfect truth,

govern in perfect order,

work for perfect potentiality,

move when the time is perfect.

Because of non-struggle, therefore, there is no blame.

Eminent goodness is like water.

Water is good at benefiting all things,

Yet it actively competes.

It retires to undesirable places.

Thus it is near to Tao.

Dwelling in good places,

Drawing from good sources,

Supplying from good nature,

Speaking with good trust,

Governing with good rules,

Conducting with good ability,

And acting within good time.

For this reason,

There is no competition,

There is no concern.

VIII

True
goodness is like water

It gives itself to all without argument

It lives in the lowest places that most scorn

And therefore it is close to the tao

So...

Live modestly

Reason deeply

Give wholeheartedly

Speak sincerely

Govern modestly

Work skillfully

Move in rhythm with the flow of life

Be
in these ways like water, and you can never go wrong

Higher Good Is like Water

Higher good is like water:

the good in water benefits all,

and does so without contention.

It rests where people dislike to be,

so it is close to the Way.

Where it dwells becomes good ground;

profound is the good in its heart,

benevolent the good it bestows.

Goodness in words is trustworthiness,

goodness in government is order;

goodness in work is ability,

goodness in action is timeliness.

But only by noncontention

is there nothing extreme.

The best virtue is like water.

Water nurtures everything; yet, without rivaling, it flows towards lower grounds, where people would be reluctant to go.

Water behaves like following Tao.

Live in suitable place;

Think deeply;

Give generously;

Keep one's words;

Rule orderly;

Do things ably;

Act when the time is right.

Do not rival, then there would be no trouble.

The man of the highest goodness is like water.

Water knows how to benefit all things without striving with them.

It stays in places loathed by all men.

Therefore, it comes near the Way.

In choosing your dwelling, know how to keep to the earth.

In cultivating your mind, know how to dive in the abyss.

In dealing with others, know how to be in relation to benevolence.

In speaking, know how to keep faithfulness.

In controlling the affairs of the state, know how to maintain good governing.

In working, know how to be suitable to ability.

In acting, know how to be suitable to time.

If you do not strive with others, you will be free from error.

Highest good, like water.

Water provides to everything, yet not demanding.

It flows to lowly places (which is shunted by men), is like Tao.

Dwell, in good place.

Meditate, into the depth of the heart.

Be Jen.

Speak, trustworthily.

Rules, be just.

In business, be competent.

In action, be timely.

No argument. No blame.

The highest good is like water.

For water benefits the ten thousand things without striving.

It settles in places that people avoid

and so is like the Tao.

In
choosing your horne look to the land.

In preparing your heart go deep.

In associating with others value gentleness.

In speaking exhibit good faith.

In governing pruvide good order.

In the conduct of business be competent.

In action be timely.

Then
there is no strife, nothing goes amiss.

The
objective

is to become

like water.

Water is the basis of life in all living beings,

yet it is consciousless

and flows away from all high places.

It lives underground

and in the swamps that people disdain.

Thus it is the best example

of the way.

In building a physical structure, build close to the earth.

In constructing an intellectual edifice, keep it close to the heart.

In affairs of the heart and mind, be deep.

In affairs of money and human need, be generous.

In friendship, be gentle.

In words, be true.

In leadership, be just.

In work, be effective.

In action, precise.

By
not contending with anyone

there is no strife,

and with no strife,

no failure.

The highest good is like that of water.

The goodness of water is that it benefits the ten thousand creatures; yet itself
hardly ever scrambles -

it seems quite content with the places that all men disdain.

It's this that can make water so near to some dao.

And if men think the ground the best place for building a house upon,

if among thoughts they value those that are profound,

if in friendship they value gentleness;

in words, truth, or sincere faithfulness,

in government, [bugbear] order;

in deeds: competence, ability, effectiveness;

in actions: timeliness and being properly timed -

In each case it's because they prefer things that hardly lead to strife, and
therefore hardly go much astray or amiss.

The highest good is like water;

Water is good at benefiting the myriad creatures

but also struggles to occupy the place loathed by the masses.

Therefore,

It is near to the Way.

The quality of an abode is in its location,

The quality of the heart is in its depths,

The quality of giving lies in trust,

The quality of correct governance lies in orderly rule,

The quality of an enterprise depends on ability,

The quality of movement depends on timing.

Now,

It is precisely because one does not compete that there is no blame.

The greatest virtue is like water; it is good to all things.

It attains the most inaccessible places without strife.

Therefore it is like Tao.

It has the virtue of adapting itself to its place.

It is virtuous like the heart by being deep.

It is virtuous like speech be being faithful.

It is virtuous like government in regulating.

It is virtuous like a servant in its ability.

It is virtuous like action by being in season.

And because it does not strive it has no enemies.

Be to Each Other Like Water

Be to each other like water.

It brings nourishment to all it touches

without effort or strain.

It seeks out the low places

and does not strive to raise itself

above all others.

Do not seek to lord it over your beloved.

There is no hierarchy in a union of souls.

Each of you must flow like a stream

and surround the other with nurture and refreshment.

Is there a sense of flow to your life together,

or is there a sense of strain and effort?

Are you competing instead of nourishing?

How will you nourish your beloved today?

The best (man) is like water. Water is good; it benefits all things
and does not compete with them. It dwells in (lowly) places that all
disdain. This is why it is so near to Tao.

(The best man) in his dwelling loves the earth. In his heart, he loves
what is profound. In his associations, he loves humanity. In his words,
he loves faithfulness.

In government, he loves order. In handling affairs, he loves competence. In his activities, he loves timeliness.

It is because he does not compete that he is without reproach.

Man at his best,
like water,

Serves as he goes along:

Like water he seeks his own level,

The common level of life,

Loves living close to the earth,

Living clear down in his heart,

Loves kinship with his neighbors,

The pick of words that tell the truth,

The even tenor of a well-run state,

The fair profit of able dealing,

The right timing of useful deeds,

And for blocking no one's way

No one blames him.

The best is like water.

Water benefits everything without fighting for credit.

Only without fighting for credit, will water never get any trouble.

It flows to the lowest places where no one wants to stay,

So water is the closest to the DAO.

Therefore, one should have the traits of water:

Humble and lowly in his character,

Peaceful and deep in his heart,

Charitable in his treatment of everything,

Credible in his words,

Methodical in his ways of governing a country,

Capable of doing anything,

And able to catch opportunities when taking action.

Only without fighting for credit, will one never get any trouble.

The highest good is like water,

Benefiting all but contending with none,

Flowing in low places which the masses disdain.

Hence, it is close to the goodness of the Tao.

In dwelling, be grounded,

In thinking, be deep,

In giving, be balanced,

In speaking, be truthful,

In governing, be orderly,

In working, be competent,

In action, be timely.

In following the virtues of water,

The sage contends with no one,

And therefore he invites no troubles in life.

The perfect goodness is like the water.

Water benefits everything without caring for its own profit,

And lives in places that none would like.

As a good instance of the able Way,

Water is best at choosing places for its existence,

Freeing its mind for working up new wonders

Matching the heaven in generous grace

Speaking with the most persuasive power,

Governing supremely without verbalized policies

Crowning everything it does with success

And taking its actions at the best times.

For one who struggles for nothing

Will find no difficulty in everything.

The highest goodness is like water.

Water effortlessly benefits all things without struggling.

It is content to flow to the low places that people scorn.

In this way water is in accordance with the TAO.

Therefore:

In dwelling, live close to the Earth.

For the mind, depth should be sought.

In conflict, be fair and righteous.

In government, self-mastery, competence and timing is preferred.

The sage does not strive,

Therefore no one can strive against him.

