===== Chapter 69 =====

[About] using soldiers, there exists a saying:

"We dare not act as lords but rather as guests.

[We] do not dare to advance an inch but rather retreat a foot."

This is called

Prevailing without prevailing

Repelling without an arm

Throwing [them] out without resisting [them]

Holding [them] without a fight.

There is no misfortune greater than trivializing an enemy.

[If we] trivialize an enemy, how many funerals [will be] our "reward"?

Therefore

[When] opposing armies clash with each

Those who mourn are in fact the winners.

There is a saying in the army: I do not presume to be the master, But
become the guest. I do not dare advance an inch, but retreat a foot.

This is called moving without moving, rolling up sleeves without showing
your arms, Repelling without opposing, Wielding without a weapon.

There is no disaster greater than Contempt for the enemy.

Contempt for the enemy - what a treasure is lost! Therefore, When the fighting gets hot, Those who grieve will conquer.

Experts in warfare have a saying:

"I dare not launch an attack.

I'd rather mount a defense.

I dare not advance a foot,

I'd rather retreat a mile."

This is called:

Moving forward without moving forward.

Removing the sleeves without baring the arms.

Being armed without holding a weapon.

Seizing the enemy without confronting him.

There is no worse disaster than to have no enemy.

If I have no enemy my treasure is as good as lost.

Thus when the battle begins

And the opponents are evenly matched

It is the grieving side that wins.

THE COMPASSIONATE WARRIOR

Among great warriors, it is spoken:

It is more propitious to be the defender than the aggressor.

Better to retreat a foot than advance an inch.

This is known as:

Marching without the appearance of moving.

Preparing for conflict without the appearance of arming.

Arming without the appearance of weapons.

Confronting the foe without the appearance of attack.

To engage in war lightly -

To underestimate the foe,

These are catastrophes as severe as the loss of one's treasures -

Those abilities for compassion, renunciation

and the rejection of preeminence.

Thus, when a battle is joined,

Victory is achieved by the compassionate warrior,

Who delights not in conflict.

From using force a saying emerges: I dare not act like a ruler, but instead I must act like a guest.

Do not venture an inch when you can withdraw a foot.

This is called progress without progressing.

Seize without seizing.

Apply force to no opponent.

Manage without weapons.

There is no greater calamity than disregarding the enemy.

Disregarding your enemy brings you close to the death of what you treasure.

When two armies meet and inspect each other, grieve for the winner!

THE USE OF THE MYSTERIOUS WAY

A great strategist saith: 'I dare not take the offensive. I prefer the

defensive. I dare not advance an inch; I prefer to retreat a foot.'

Place therefore the army where there is no army; prepare for action where

there is no engagement; strike where there is no conflict; advance

against the enemy where the enemy is not.

There
is no error so great as to engage in battle without sufficient

force. To do so is to risk losing the gentleness which is beyond price.

Thus when the lines actually engage, he who regretteth the necessity is

the victor.

A master of the art of war has said, 'I do not dare to be the host(to commence the war); I prefer to be the guest (to act on the defensive).I do not dare to advance an inch; I prefer to retire a foot.' This is calledmarshalling the ranks where there are no ranks; baring the arms (to fight)where there are no arms to bare; grasping the weapon where there is noweapon to grasp: advancing against the enemy where there is no enemy. Thereis no calamity greater than lightly engaging in war. To do that is nearlosing (the gentleness) which is so precious. Thus it is that when opposingweapons are (actually) crossed, he who deplores (the situation) conquers.

One who understands that quarrels will never solve anything,

Won't start them anymore and prefers to wait

He rather takes a step back or retracts

That's what people call winning by losing

Showing strength without impressing

Standing firm without starting a fight

Nothing is more disastrous than underestimating your enemy

One who underestimates his enemy exposes oneself to danger

Therefore he who's driven by compassion

Is always the winner in a conflict

Military maxims say: "It is easier to defend than to attack." "It is better to back away a foot than to assault to gain an inch."

This means that the best way to advance is to retreat. He who bares his flesh will appear to have no need for carrying weapons. He who does not flourish weapons appears to have nothing to defend. He who does not prepare to defend himself appears to have no enemies.

No one will attack a person unless he appears to be an enemy, For to attack one who is not an enemy is to lose a friend.

Therefore, when opposing enemies meet for open battle, he who runs away to hide is the one who wins.

The strategists have the sayings:

"When you doubt your ability to meet the enemy's attack,

Take the offensive yourself"

And "If you doubt your ability to advance an inch, then retreat a foot".

This latter is what we call to march without moving,

To roll the sleeve, but present no bare arm,

The hand that seems to hold, yet had no weapon in it,

A host that can confront, yet presents no battle-front.

Now the greatest of all calamities is to attack and find no enemy.

I can have no enemy only at the price of losing my treasure.

Therefore when armies are raised

And issues joined it is he who does not delight in war that wins.

Skillful warriors have a saying:

"Do not move first, play the guest.

Do not move forward an inch, retreat a foot."

This is called advancing without moving.

Reaching without showing one's arms.

Capturing without attacking.

Doing battle without weapons.

There is no greater mistake than underestimating the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy, I risk losing everything of value.

Thus, when equal opponents are matched,

the one aware of sorrow will prevail.

Military strategists have a saying:

"I will not dare to act as host,

But rather, act as guest,

Will not presume to advance an inch,

But rather, retreat a foot"

This may be called "to move without movement,

To roll up sleeves without baring arms,

To depose without a fight

To capture without force"

There is no danger greater than underestimating a foe

Underestimate a foe will risk losing what we value

And so when opposing forces meet each other

The one sympathetic will truly succeed

Ambush

Those who use weapons have a saying which goes:

"I do not presume to act like the host

but instead play the part of the guest;

I do not advance and inch

but would rather retreat a foot".

This is called moving forward

without appearing to move -

Rolling up one's sleeves

without showing one's arms -

Grasping firmly, without holding a weapon -

And enticing to fight when there is no opponent.

Of disasters, there is no greater catastrophe

Than thinking you have no rival.

To think you have no rival,

Is to come close to losing my treasures.

Therefore when weapons are raised,

and opponents are fairly well matched,

Then is the one who feels grief that will win.

In conflict it is better to be receptive than aggressive, better to retreat a foot than advance an inch.

This is called moving ahead without advancing, capturing the enemy without attacking him.

There is no greater misfortune than underestimating your opponent. To underestimate your opponent is to forsake your three treasures.

When opposing forces are engaged in conflict, the one who fights with sorrow will triumph.

The generals have a saying

Which they apply to war,

And I teach it too:

Better to be aggression's guest,

Than its partisan host.

Better to draw back a mile

Than press forward an inch.

This is called marching

Without moving your feet;

Capturing without an assault;

Defeating without an enemy.

For there is no greater error

Than looking outward for enemies.

To look outward for enemies

Is to estrange your only true self.

This is why two sides opposed

Will fight to a bloody draw,

Where sorrow is the only victor.

This poem contains a warning against adopting a way of impulsive action, which will inevitably trap a person within a self-perpetuating cycle of opposition, where conflict is unceasing, battle lines always drawn and redrawn, where truce is tenuous and temporary, and where only sorrow wins. As elsewhere in the Tao Te Ching, the metaphor of "moving the feet" is symbolic of impulsive action—see also Chapters 31 and 64. Again, Lao Tzu points out that aggression tends to perpetuate itself: the search for outer enemies is the first and final act of self-destruction.

Tao Strategy

Ancient
military strategists said:

I would rather be invaded than be the invader.

I would rather retreat one foot than advance one inch.

This
means not marching in formation;

not appearing prepared, with sleeves up;

not charging in frontal assault;

not arming with elaborate weapons.

There
is no worse catastrophe

than to underestimate the enemy.

To underestimate the enemy

is to run the risk of losing everything.

When
evenly matched armies do battle,

the passive, recessive one is the victor.

Military commanders have a saying:

I dare not act as host but only as a guest; rather than advance an inch I would retire a foot.

This marching without moving; bearing the invisible arm; regarding the enemy as if he were not; grasping the sword that is not.

There is no calamity greater than making light of the enemy; to make light of the enemy is to endanger my retention of the treasures. Hence once the opposing forces have met it is the pitiful who conquer.

An ancient tactician has said:

'I dare not act as a host, but would rather act as a guest;

I dare not advance an inch, but would rather retreat a foot.'

This implies that he does not marshal the ranks as if there were no ranks;

He does not roll up his sleeves as if he had no arms;

He does not seize as if he had no weapons;

He does not fight as if there were no enemies.

No calamity is greater than under-estimating the enemy.

To under-estimate the enemy is to be on the point of losing our treasure (love).

Threfore when opposing armies meet in the field the ruthful will win.

Profound Use

There are slogans for using armies.

"I don't presume to deem-act as lord and deem-act as guest.

Don't presume to advance an inch and withdraw a foot."

This is called "carrying out not carrying out.

Bearing non-existent arms;

Throwing against non-existent enemies.

Controlling non-existing armies."

No disaster is greater than taking an enemy lightly.

Taking an enemy lightly almost brings my treasures to grief.

Inherently, opposing armies strengthen each other.

Grieving then wins.

On military operations we have:

"I do not boldly attack others first,

But take action only after being attacked."

"I do not boldly move forward even an inch,

But withdraw a foot."

This is called the operation of non-operation,

Bearing the arms of non-arms,

Charging the enemy of non-enemy,

Carrying the weapons of non-weapons.

There is no more serious misfortune

Than to engage in war lightly.

To engage in war lightly is to violate my essential teachings of compassion, renunciation, and never longing to be first in the world.

Therefore, when two armies join in battle,

The one that is compassionate wins.

There is a saying among military strategists:

'I dare not act as the host, but the guest.

I dare advance an inch, but retreat a foot.'

This is called conducting in non-conducting.

Pulling back without using force.

Facing the fight without engaging the enemy.

Holding no weapons.

The greatest danger is to undervalue the enemy.

To undervalue the enemy will cause loss of the three treasures.

That is why when two forces fight against each other, the one that is full of sorrow will win.

A strategist once said:

"I dare not play the host,

Rather, I'd play the guest;

I dare not advance one inch,

Rather, I'd retreat one foot.

Which means:

Marching without ranks,

Baring no arms,

Holding no weapons,

I will still emerge invincible.

No calamity is greater than being invincible;

Being invincible almost cost me my treasures."

Therefore, when two confronting armies are equally matched,

The compassionate party wins.

A tactician in ancient times said:

"I do not dare to act as a host,

I prefer to act as a guest,

I do not dare to advance an inch,

I prefer to retreat a foot."

This implies that he does not muster his armies, as if he has no armies,

He does not roll up his sleeves, as if his arms are not ready,

He does not go out to battle, as if he has no weapons,

He does not fight, as if he has no enemies.

The greatest calamity is to underestimate the strength of the enemy,

For underestimating the strength of the enemy leads to the loss of our treasure of love.

Therefore, when armies clash on the battlefield,

The one that possesses the treasure will triumph.

The strategists have a saying,

I dare not play the host but play the guest,

I dare not advance an inch but retreat a foot instead.

This
is known as marching forward when there is no road,

Rolling up one's sleeves when there is no arm,

Dragging one's adversary by force when there is no adversary,

And taking up arms when there are no arms.

There
is no disaster greater than taking on an enemy too easily.

So doing nearly cost me my treasure.

Thus of two sides raising arms against each other,

It is the one that is sorrow-stricken that wins.

The Function of the Mysterious

A military expert used to say: 'I dare not act as host [who takes the initiative] but act as guest [with reserve]. I dare not advance an inch, but I withdraw a foot."

This is called marching without marching, threatening without arms, charging without hostility, seizing without weapons.

No greater misfortune than making light of the enemy! When we make light of the enemy, it is almost as though we had lost our treasure--[compassion].

Thus, if matched armies encounter one another, the one who does so in sorrow is sure to conquer.

There is a saying:"It is sometimes better to wait and see than to act first. It is safer to retreat a foot, than to advance and inch."

Following this saying, energy is conserved. When the correct course of action becomes apparent, you are able to act. In trying to overcome the ego, it can't be defeated directly. Don't see it as bad, and there will be no conflict in you. If you create conflict, your three treasures will be lost, and you will become an enemy to yourself. To overcome the ego, yield to it, and simply be aware of its motivations. Once its motivations are apparent, it is discredited and will lose all power over you.

A saying among warriors:

I dare not play host, I prefer playing guest;

I dare not advance an inch, I prefer retreating a foot.

This is formless formation,

this is defenseless advancement,

this is oppositionless encounter,

this is weaponless display.

No disaster is greater than underestimating the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy verges on losing my treasures.

Thus, when two equal-size armies are in combat, the one that is grieved wins.

There was once a saying among those who wielded armies:

I'd much rather be a guest than a host,

much rather retreat a foot than advance an inch.

This is called marching without marching,

rolling up sleeves without baring arms,

raising swords without brandishing weapons,

entering battle without facing an enemy.

There's no greater calamity than dishonoring an enemy.

Dishonor an enemy and you'll lose those treasures of mine.

When armies face one another in battle,

it's always the tender-hearted one that prevails.

The military strategist says:

I dare not be an aggressor, but a defender;

I dare not advance an inch, but to retreat a foot.

This implies that we:

March without formation;

Raise no arms;

Face enemies undetected; and

Hold hidden weapons.

There is no greater danger than underestimating the enemy,

Underestimating the enemy nearly destroys my treasures.

Therefore:

When to armies of equal strength go to battle,

The aggrieved side wins.

Strategists
possess words

I am without venturing to act as lord yet act as guest

Without venturing to enter an inch yet fall back a foot.

Appropriately
called

Going absent of going

Grabbing absent of an arm

Throwing absent of opposition

Taking hold of absent of an enemy.

No
misfortune is greater than relating to light opposition

Light opposition severs and destroys my principles.

So
when opposing strategies escalate each other

Conquering goes with those who mourn.

Rather be on the defensive than the offensive, rather retreat a step than advance an inch, are current principles of military art. It is worth more to yield than to triumph. Prevention (of war) through diplomacy is worth even more.

That is the meaning of certain abstruse formulae of military art, such as: advancing without marching; defending oneself without moving an arm; status quo without fighting; holding on without weapons; and others.

There is no worse curse than a war waged with little or no reason, (which is sought-after deliberately, and pushed beyond necessary limits).

He who does that, exposes his own goods to loss, and causes great mourning.

In using the military, there is a saying:

I dare not be the host, but prefer to be the guest

I dare not advance an inch, but prefer to withdraw a foot

This is called marching in formation without formation

Raising arms without arms

Grappling enemies without enemies

Holding weapons without weapons

There is no greater disaster than to underestimate the enemy

Underestimating the enemy almost made me lose my treasures

So when evenly matched armies meet

The side that is compassionate shall win

In military strategy as well as life strategy, we have a saying that goes like this:

"I dare not be the host - the aggressor that initiates the conflict. I prefer to be the guest - the cautious defender.

"I dare not move forward into a fight, even by an inch. I prefer to move back a foot, to let my opponent overextend and thus lose balance."

With such a strategy, you are actually marching in formation - moving purposefully with a plan - but it appears as if you have no formation.

You are actually using your arms - taking action - but it appears as if you have no arms.

You are actually grappling with the enemy - coming to grips with your opponent - but it appears as if you have no enemies.

You are actually holding a weapon - wielding an effective tool - but it appears as if you have no weapons.

The worst thing you can do in warfare is to underestimate your opponent. The worst thing you can do in life is to underestimate your challenges. In either case, it can cause you to charge forth recklessly. When I did that, I almost lost my treasures (compassion, conservation, and humility).

From this principle, we can see that when evenly matched armies or individuals clash, the side that approaches the conflict with compassion instead of aggression will end up with a truly meaningful victory.

Notes

Many people believe that overwhelming force wins respect. This belief forms the basis of the "shock and awe" military strategy. History shows that such strategies simply do not work. Aggression succeeds only in planting the seeds of subsequent retaliation. It is wisdom and restraint that win respect and admiration, not force.

Judo and Aikido are based on the concepts described in this chapter more than 2,500 years ago. A master of these arts may appear to be yielding and retreating, and yet is devastatingly effective in combat.

Tao sages apply the same concepts to life. Acting from compassion, they realize that it is more important to be kind than to be right. In an argument, why not let the others "win"?

THE FUNCTION OF THE MYSTERIOUS

A military expert has said: I do not dare put myself forward as a host, but always act as a guest. I hesitate to advance an inch, but am willing to withdraw a foot.

This is advancing by not advancing, it is winning without arms, it is charging without hostility, it is seizing without weapons. There is no mistake greater than making light of an enemy. By making light of an enemy we lose our treasure.

Therefore when well-matched armies come to conflict, the one who is conscious of his weakness conquers.

In engaging in warfare it is said:

I dare not be the host but be the guest,

I dare not advance an inch but retreat a foot.

This is called to march without advancing,

To roll up one's sleeves without baring one's arms,

To throw a rope without an enemy,

To carry without a weapon.

Of all calamities (huo),

None is greater than underestimating one's enemy.

In underestimating my enemy,

I risk losing my treasure (pao).

Therefore when opposing armies are engaged in battle,

The sorrowful party will win.

Tao Strategy

Ancient military strategists said: "I would rather be invaded than be the invader; I would rather retreat one foot than advance one inch."

This means not marching in formation; not appering prepared, with sleeves up; not charging in frontal assault; not arming with elaborate weapons.

There is no more fateful catastrophe than to understimate the enemy. To underestimate the enemy is to run the risk of losing treasures. Thus, when evenly matched armies battle, the passive, recessive one is the victor.

There is a saying among military strategists:

"Instead of advancing, I'll be advanced upon;

it is better to retreat a foot than to advance an inch."

This is known as advancing without advancing,

getting ready without showing your muscles,

capturing without attacking,

being well–armed without weapons.

There is nothing worse than underestimating your enemy.

That leads to total defeat.

Therefore, when armies clash,

it is the side that does not rejoice in war–making that wins.

Sixty-nine

There is a saying among soldiers:

I dare not make the first move but would rather play the guest;

I dare not advance and inch but would rather withdraw a foot.

This is called marching without appearing to move,

Rolling up your sleeves without showing your arm,

Capturing the enemy without attacking,

Being armed without weapons.

There
is no greater catastrophe than underestimating the enemy.

By underestimating the enemy, I almost lost what I value.

Therefore
when the battle is joined,

The underdog will win.

A strategist says:

I dare not launch an attack but strengthen defense capabilities;

I dare not advance an inch but retreat a foot instead.

This means to deploy battle array by showing no battle array;

To wield one's arm to attack by showing no arm to lift;

To face the enemy by showing no enemy to attack;

To hold weapons by showing no weapons to hold.

No disaster is greater than underestimating the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy nearly cost me my treasure (i. e. three treasured weapons, see 67).

That is why the sorrow-laden side wins

When two armies are at war.

The strategists'saying:

"I dare not play the host but play the guest,

I dare not advance an inch but retreat a foot."

This is called marching no-marching,

Stretching no-arms,

Arming with no-weapons,

Charging at no-enemy.

No disaster is greater than making light of the enemy.

When I make light of the enemy, I may lose my treasure.

Therefore, when two sides confront each other with arms,

The one who grieves wins.

There is a saying among the militarists:

"I would rather defend than initiate an attack.

I would be most reluctant to advance an inch but quite ready to retreat a foot."

The ultimate ideal is as follows:

Not having any battalions to form a configuration,

Not having to initiate an attack,

Not needing to take up arms,

And not having to fight a war.

There is no disaster worse than to underestimate your enemy,

For this could endanger your life.

Hence, if two evenly-matched armies fight against each other,

The aggrieved side that feels poignantly oppressed will win.

Mystic Application

Hsuan Yung

Military strategists have said -

I dare not be the host,

But prefer to be the guest.

I dare not advance one inch,

But prefer to retreat a foot.

This is called -

Marching as if without motion;

Brandishing arms as if having none;

Attacking as if without enmity;

Seizing as if without weapons.

No disaster is greater than belittling the enemy.

Belittling the enemy almost ruins my treasures.

Therefore, when two armies encounter each other,

The side that laments war will win.

A great strategist has said: "I will not issue a challenge, but being challenged will give a good account of myself.

Rather than advance an unnecessary inch I will retire a foot."

This might be called:

Marching by standing still;

Baring the arms, but not raising them to fight;

Keeping the hand on the hilt of the unsheathed sword;

Being prepared for battle, but not engaging the enemy.

No calamity could be greater than that which results from underestimating the enemy.

To underestimate the enemy is to risk the loss of one's greatest treasure - life itself.

Thus it is that when enemies meet in battle, the side that deplores the conflict will most surely be victorious.

The strategists have a saying:

I dare not be a host,

But rather a guest;

Dare not advance an inch,

But rather retreat a foot.

This is called

Marching by not-marching,

Capturing by not-baring arms,

Charging by not attacking,

Seizing by not-bearing arms.

There is no evil heavier

Than to make light of an enemy.

To make light of an enemy

Is to lose what we value.

Thus when armies clash

The one that grieves wins.

The strategist who has achieved excellence says: dare not to be the host, but rather be the guest.

Dare not to be the restless aggressor, but rather be the calm defender.

Dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.

March forward where there is no obstacle.

Stretch out your arm only where there is no confrontation.

Charge an opponent where there is no resistance.

Hold a weapon that is invisible.

There is no greater mistake than to underestimate the power of an opponent.

To underestimate the power of an opponent may cost a man his life.

Therefore, when opposing troops meet in battle,

it is the side with the greatest caution that wins.

LXIX.

Profound
Use

An
experienced soldier said, I dare not be

The
host in war, I d rather be the guest;

I
dare not, at the first, advance an inch,

But
rather would retire a foot if pressed.

It is
to march when there s nowhere to march,

To
threat with arms when there are arms nowhere,

To
charge without an enemy in sight,

To
take by sword and spear when none are there.

Misfortune
never greater can there be

Than
to make light of enemies in war,

Thereby
we lose our all, for then when meet

Embattled
hosts, the weak is conqueror.

A great soldier used to say:

"I plan not to be a Lord, but to be a follower; I plan not to advance an inch, but to recede a foot.

This is called:

Advancing with the advantage of Inner Life, baring the arm with the energy of Inner Life, grasping a weapon with the force of Inner Life, meeting the foe as a soldier of Inner Life.

There is no calamity greater than lightly to engage in war.

To engage lightly in war is to lose our treasure of gentleness.

Therefore, when soldiers meet who are equally strong,

He who is compassionate shall conquer.

The planners of fights

have a saying:

I do not want to receive guests,

but I would like to be a guest;

I do not want to go forward an inch,

but I would like to go back a foot.

This is called marching without moving,

Rolling up one's sleeves without baring one's arms,

Capturing the enemy without facing them,

Holding a weapon that is invisible.

There is no greater disaster

than to under-estimate

the strength of your enemy.

For to under-estimate the strength

of your enemy

is to lose your treasure.

When disagreeing armies

meet in battle,

victory belongs to

the sorrowing side.

A strategist of old has said:

"I dare not be host, I prefer being guest. I dare not advance one inch, I prefer withdrawing one foot."

This is called: to march without marching, to roll up one's sleeves without having an arm, to draw without having a sword, to attack without having an adversary.

There is no greater calamity than underestimating one's adversary.

If I underestimate my adversary, I risk losing my treasures.

For, when the opposing arms are crossed, he who yields, will win.

A master of the art of war has said, 'I do not dare to be the

host (to commence the war); I prefer to be the guest (to act on the

defensive). I do not dare to advance an inch; I prefer to retire a

foot.' This is called marshalling the ranks where there are no ranks;

baring the arms (to fight) where there are no arms to bare; grasping

the weapon where there is no weapon to grasp; advancing against the

enemy where there is no enemy.

There
is no calamity greater than lightly engaging in war. To do

that is near losing (the gentleness) which is so precious. Thus it is

that when opposing weapons are (actually) crossed, he who deplores

(the situation) conquers.

Strategists
have a saying:
"I
dare not be the host,
but would rather be a guest!
I advance not an
inch,
but retreat a foot."
This
is called
Marching out of file;
Bearing nonexistent arms;
Flourishing
nonexistent weapons; and
Driving back nonexistent enemies.
There
is no greater a misfortune
than not having a worthy foe;
once I believe
there are no worthy foes about,
I have well-nigh forfeited all my treasures.

Therefore,
when opposing forces are evenly matched,
The one who is saddened by that
WINS.

In
conflict just be cautious

And always on your guard

Rather than advance an inch

Instead retreat a yard

In
this way you go along

And make your gain without advancing

You deal with the rival

As your position is enhancing

Remember
that it's possible

Your rival just may yield

So don't advance on such a foe

Let differences be healed

THE strategists have a saying: I dare not be a host, but rather a guest; I dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.

This is called marching without moving,

Rolling up one's sleeves without baring one's arms,

Capturing the enemy without confronting him,

Holding a weapon that is invisible.

There is no greater calamity than to under-estimate the strength of your enemy.

For to under-estimate the strength of your enemy is to lose your treasure.

Therefore, when opposing troops meet in battle, victory belongs to the grieving side.

The military veteran has a saying, "rather then rushing in, it is better to wait to see what they will do".

They also say: "Rather than advancing an inch at great cost, it is better to retreat a foot and spare life".

This is advancing without wasting energy, effort and life.

It is like pushing back without using force.

Its semblance is that of engaging the enemy without actually invading them.

Surely there is no greater calamity in war than that of thinking too little of your enemy.

Underestimating him can lead to disaster and the loss of the three treasures of compassion,

economy and the desire not to be first.

When opposing armies clash in the field, the victory will go to the one with compassion for the people,

both his and the enemy's.

He who has the greatest economy in the use of all things will be able to better maintain the expenses of marches and provisions.

The desire not to be first will result in calculating actions, and the deferral of reckless abandon.

There is an old saying:

"It is better to become the passive

in order to see what will happen.

It is better to retreat a foot

than to advance only an inch."

This
is called

being flexible while advancing,

pushing back without using force,

and destroying the enemy without engaging him.

There
is no greater disaster

than underestimating your enemy.

Underestimating your enemy

means losing your greatest assets.

When equal forces meet in battle,

victory will go to the one

that enters with the greatest sorrow.

If a group member wants to fight with you, consider the strategy of the guerrilla commander: Never seek a fight. If it comes to you, yield; step back. It is far better to step back than to overstep yourself.

Your strength is good intelligence: be aware of what is happening. Your weapon is not a weapon at all. It is the light of consciousness.

Advance only where you encounter no resistance. If you make a point, do not cling to it. If you win, be gracious.

The person who initiates the attack is off center and easily thrown. Even so, have respect for any attacker. Never surrender your compassion or use your skill to harm another needlessly.

In any event, the more conscious force will win.

The military has a saying:

"I would rather be passive, like a guest

than aggressive, like a host.

I would rather retreat a foot

than advance an inch."

This is called going forward without instigating,

Engaging without force

Defense without hatred

Victory without weapons.

There is no greater calamity than underestimating the enemy.

If I take my enemy too lightly, I am in danger of losing my

compassion, moderation and non-competitive spirit.

So, when two armies confront each other

Victory will go to them that grieve.

There
is a saying among generals,

It is better not to begin the battle

but to wait for the other side to begin.

It is better to retreat a foot

rather than advance an inch.

This
is called advancing

while appearing to retreat,

preparing to fight

by concealing your power,

winning the battle

without engaging the enemy,

and brandishing non-existent weapons.

There
is nothing worse than distinguishing others

as enemies.

By distinguishing others as enemies,

I lose sight of my oneness

and become confused in conflict and

war.

So when war seems imminent,

the victor refuses to embrace killing.

The Military has a saying:

I dare not be the Master, but rather a Guest;

I dare not advance an inch, but will retreat a foot.

This means ...

proceed without acting,

repel without arms,

repulse without resistance,

maintain without troops.

There is no misfortune so great as Light Resistance.

Light Resistance may cost me my Treasures.

Therefore, avoid military buildup.

Grief is the only Victor.

The strategists have a saying:

'I dare not take the offensive, but would rather take the defensive.1

'I dare not advance an inch, but would rather retreat a foot.'

This is called marching without moving,

Rolling up one's sleeve without showing one's arm,

Defeating an enemy without confrontation,

Being armed without weapons.

No misfortune is greater than underestimating an enemy.

Underestimating my enemy almost makes me lose my treasures.2

Therefore, when two sides takes arms against each other,

It is the side with the most reluctance which wins.

1. Strictly, 'I dare not be the host, but would rather be the guest.' That is, the host, being at home, must take the initiative, and is in this sense active whereas the guest takes the passive role.

2. Wang Pi says that these three treasures are those mentioned in Chapter 67. Underestimating one's enemy, one runs the risk of resorting to force; doing this is to 'lose the treasures'. (See P. J. Lin 1977, 127)

The ancient wise generals all held:

"Start no war.

Fight only when forced to.

A foot back instead of an inch forward."

Such military creeds all boil down to this:

Advance invisible ranks;

Raise invisible arms;

Poise invisible armies;

Fight as if one is not fighting with enemies.

The biggest military disaster is this:

To attack an enemy thoughtlessly

With threats, menaces and challenges.

For such an attack means the loss of all advantages.

When two armies battle, one against the other,

The army that fights out of love and sadness wins.

Military men have a saying: "I do not presume to act as master, I act as guest I do not presume to advance an inch, I retreat a foot."

This is like "going forward without going forward rolling up the sleeves but baring no arm attacking without showing hostility drawing with no sword."

Nothing brings greater disaster than the motto: "The enemy is nothing." Thinking, "the enemy is nothing": close to losing my Treasure.

Yes, when they cross weapons and attack each other the one in mourning will win.

The military arts teaches: I do not begin first, I have to wait. I do not advance even an inch, but rather retreat a foot. It is called to act without action, to win without violence. In this case, I have no enemies, thus I can avoid wasting power.

There is no affliction worse than to hate enemies! Hatred toward enemies is the path that leads to the loss of the most important — Tao!

Thus in battle those achieve victory who avoided it.

It is easier to retreat ten meters than to advance one,

Disputes could be solved by being in waiting.

Instead of an aggressive advancement it is better to retreat and wait,

Without displaying power and being aggressive,

Battles could be won.

Do
not underestimates your enemy, neither those courageous in battle.

In the beginning aggressiveness seems to win,

But at the end, he who is compassionate wins.

There
is a saying about using armed forces. "I dare not be the host (i.e., the initiator)
and instead become the guest. I dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat
a foot.'' That is called to make troop movements without form, shoving aside
without a forearm, destroying without involving an enemy, and wielding arms
without there being a weapon. There is no greater disaster than underestimating
one's enemy. If one were to underestimate one's enemy that would be tantamount
to losing one's treasures. So when troops of equivalent strength are opposed,
the side that goes into battle with sorrow will win.

The commander of war has said:

"I dare not be a host, but be a guest.

I dare not advance one inch, but withdraw a foot."

This means:

To set up a march as if without one.

To stretch the arm as if without one.

To confront the enemy as if without one.

To grasp war weapons as if without them.

No calamity is greater than taking the enemy lightly.

Taking the enemy lightly almost makes me lose my treasures.

Therefore, in raising arms against each other,

The one with pity will win.

Neutralizing Escalation

The strategists have a saying:

"I dare not act as a host,

Yet I act as a guest,

I dare not advance an inch,

Yet I retreat a foot."

This is called

Traveling without moving,

Rising up without arms,

Projecting without resistance,

Capturing without strategies.

No misfortune is greater than underestimating resistance;

Underestimating resistance will destroy my Treasures.

Thus when mutually opposing strategies escalate,

The one who feels sorrow will triumph.

If you are unable to bend, you will break. If you think your enemy as evil, you destroy your three treasures. The greatest victory is when there is no battle.

The strategists have a saying:

"If
I cannot be host,

Then let me be guest.

But if I dare not advance

Even an inch,

Then let me retire a foot."

This is what they call

A campaign without a march,

Sleeves up but no bare arms,

Shooting but no enemies,

Or arming without weapons.

Than helpless enemies, nothing is worse:

To them I lose my treasures.

When opposing enemies meet,

The compassionate man is the winner!

A master in the art of war is very correct in saying:

"I dare not take the offensive, but prefer to take the defensive;

I dare not advance an inch, but prefer to retreat a foot."

This is called:

Disposing no lines of troops,

Raising no arms,

Confronting no enemy,

And grasping no weapons.

There is no disaster greater than underestimating the enemy,

Underestimating the enemy nearly makes me lose my "three precious things."

Therefore the side in grief conquers in case of the balance of the forces of two sides.

Military specialists have a saying:

"I dare not play the host but instead play the guest.

I dare not advance an inch but instead retreat a foot."

In other words,

campaign in such a way that there is no campaign;

push up your sleeve so that no arm is exposed;

wield weapons in such a way that no weapons are involved;

and lead in such a way that you face no opponent.

There is no greater disaster than having no viable opponent.

If one has no viable opponent, he will soon lose my [the Laozi's] treasures.

Thus, when they raise armies that are equally matched, he who feels pity will be the victor.

1. Those who use weapons have a saying which goes:

2. "I don't presume to act like the host, and instead play the part of the guest;

3. I don't advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot."

4. This is called moving forward without moving forword—

5. Rolling up one's sleeves without baring one's arms—

6. Grasping firmly without holding a weapon—

7. And enticing to fight when there's no opponent.

8. Of disasters, none is greater than [thinking] you have no rival.

9. To think you have no rival is to come close to losing my treasures.

10. Therefore, when weapons are raised and [the opponents] are farily well matched,

11. Then it's the one who feels grief that will win.

There's an old
military saying:

"I'd rather face an attack

than have to make one.

I'd rather retreat a foot

than try to advance an inch."

That's the secret
to moving forward

while staying put,

preparing for battle

without revealing your strength.

When you defend
yourself

without any show of force,

you give your opponent

nothing to fight.

Attacking an
enemy

you've underestimated

is a costly mistake.

When two forces oppose each other,

the winner is the one most reluctant to fight.

.

The Kind Win

The strategists say,

"Do not be the aggressor but the defender.

Do not advance an inch, but retreat a foot instead."

This is movement without moving,

stretching the arm without showing it,

confronting enemies with the idea there is no enemy,

holding in the hand no weapons.

No disaster is greater than underestimating the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy will destroy my treasures.

Thus when the battle is joined,

it is the kind who will win.

A man experienced in the struggle for life knows:

Better it is to yield thoughtfully than to provoke thoughtlessly.

Better it is to retreat a foot than to advance an inch.

That is what I call:

To go forward without pushing forward.

To capture without taking.

To hold without keeping.

To conquer without defeating.

He acts disastrously who attacks wantonly since it is easy to tackle and overcome a man who is an advocate of force.

Where two clash the more thoughtful is the victor.

The Art of War

Lao Tze says,

A master of strategy once said,

'I do not dare to be the first to arouse a war.

I prefer to be passive to rise against an invasion.

I do not dare to march an inch.

I prefer to withdraw a foot.'

This is called proceeding to make an action without walking, to resist without lifting arms;

to dart without facing enemies, and to seize them without combating.

There is no calamity greater than to lightly engage in war.

To do that nearly results in the loss of the three precious things I mentioned before.

That is why when opposing armies meet, the sorrowful side conquers.

THE USE OF THE MYSTERIOUS TAO

Arguments
may be won by waiting,

rather than making an aggresive move;

by withdrawing rather than advancing.

By
moving without appearing to move,

by not making a show of strength,

but by conserving it well;

by capturing without attacking,

by being armed, but with no weapons,

great battles may be won.

Do not underestimate

those you enjoin in battle,

for this can result in losing

what is of greatest value.

When a battle is enjoined,

by remembering this,

the weaker may still win.

The generals have a saying:

"Rather than make the first move

it is better to wait and see.

Rather than advance an inch

it is better to retreat a yard."

This is called

going forward without advancing,

pushing back without using weapons.

There is no greater misfortune

than underestimating your enemy.

Underestimating your enemy

means thinking that he is evil.

Thus you destroy your three treasures

and become an enemy yourself.

When two great forces oppose each other,

the victory will go

to the one that knows how to yield.

The Conduct of War has this to say:

"I dare not take the initiative but rather to be resistant.

I dare not advance an inch but rather I withdraw a foot."

So that, engage the enemy without advancing.

Drive out the enemy without arms.

Subdue the enemy without battle.

Take the enemy with invincibility.

No fault is greater than to underestimate the enemy:

To underestimate the enemy is to destroy all my treasured principles.

When an army of resistance engages, the mournful one - the army of resistance, wins.

There is a saying on using military force:

I dare not be the host, but rather a guest.

I dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.

This is called performing without performing, rolling up one's sleeves without showing the arms.

By not holding on to an enemy, there is no enemy.

There is no disaster greater than having no enemy.

Having no enemy almost destroys my treasure.

When opposing armies clash, those who cry win!

LXIX

Consider
the phrases 'discretion is the better part of valor'

And 'fall back a foot rather than struggle for an inch'

Moving forward sometimes means stepping backwards

Strength sometimes means letting yourself be weak

Hold to your center or any weapon is useless

Be open to all, and let opponents come to you

It's
arrogance that leads you to think no one can defeat you

And arrogance can only lead to tragedy for one or the other

If you have to fight, you'll do better to forget about the victory

And strive, instead, to contain everyone's loses

Sayings on Military Operations

There are sayings on the use of arms:

"Let us not be aggressors,

but defend."

"Let us not advance an inch,

but retreat a foot."

This is called carrying out no action,

shaking no arm,

facing no enemy,

wielding no weapon.

No calamity is greater

than underestimating opponents.

If you underestimate opponents,

you're close to losing your treasure.

So when opposing armies clash,

the compassionate are the ones who win.

It is a military saying that when engaging in war, we do not aggress but defend; we do not advance an inch but retreat a foot.

This is marching without formation.

Do not roll up sleeves.

Confront no enemy.

Commit to no weapons.

The most serious mistake is to underestimate the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy almost caused me to lose my treasures.

Thus, when two comparable armies fight, the lamenting one wins.

The strategists have a saying: I dare not be a host, but rather a guest; I dare not advance an inch, but rather retreat a foot.

This is called going without marching, rolling up one's sleeves without baring one's arms, capturing the enemy without confronting him, holding a weapon that is invisible.

There is no greater calamity than to underestimate the enemy.

To underestimate the enemy is to lose your treasure.

Therefore, when opposing troops meet in battle, victory belongs to the grieving side.

There is a saying in arts of war.

I dare not make the first move, rather play the defense.

I dare not advance an inch, rather withdraw a foot.

This is called attack with without attacking.

Throw you jab without showing your arm movement,

you are invincible.

The greatest catastrophe on war is always caused by underestimating the enemy.

Underestimating the enemy, you could lose everything.

Because, who fight for the survival, double the strength.

Fight for survival, ensures victory.

The master soldiers have a saying:

I dare not be the host but prefer to be the guest.

I dare not advance an inch

but prefer to retreat a foot.

This
is called marching without Inoving,

rolling up a sleeve without baring an arm,

capturing a foe without a battlefront,

arming yourself without weapons.

There
is no disaster greater than attacking

and finding no enemy.

Doing so will cost you your treasure.

Thus it is that when opposing forces meet,

victory will go to those

who take no delight in the situation.

Military
strategists have said

When you don't think you have a good defense,

take the offense

When you don't think you have a good offense,

retreat.

Retreat is called marching in place

rolling up your sleeves but not showing any muscle

the rose in the fisted glove

confronting without threatening.

In
life there is nothing worse than

getting mad and attacking

and finding

nothing there ...

Only
by losing your possessions

and your self

can you have no enemy.

In
war, when armies are recruited and conscripted

when battles are waged

the victor will be the reluctant nation

who takes no joy or glory from fighting.

The strategists say:

"If I dare not be the guest, then let me be the host. When I dare not take the
offensive, then I'll take the defensive. If you doubt your ability to advance,
then retreat." Also: "When you doubt your ability to meet the enemy's attack,
take the offensive yourself."

Much
of this his implies to march without visible formations; its in part like rolling
up the sleeve, and yet presenting no bare arm. Or it could be like stretching
your arm without showing the sleeves.

Confront
well, present no battle-front yourself. Refrain from charging in frontal attacks,
and seem to be armed without weapons. [Let that come as a surprise.] Hold a
thousand weapons without seeming to have them.

Now,
great calamity comes from making light of an enemy. There's no greater catastrophe
than if a foolishly underestimated enemy robs and destroys your most cherished
treasures. It could even destroy your topmost treasure, your old, dear body.
Refrain from having an enemy at the price of losing your body and life. Remember:
He whose enemy presents no front, could lose his booty.

Therefore
when armies meet, the kind-looking man of sorrows could win [by such as surprise
tactics. But often it's the opposite that happens.] Who doesn't delight in warfare
in the open, he wins. [And most often not?]

The strategists have a saying:

"I dare not be host, but would rather be guest;

I advance not an inch, but instead retreat a foot."

This is called

Marching without ranks,

Bearing nonexistent arms,

Flourishing nonexistent weapons,

Driving back nonexistent enemies.

There is no greater misfortune than not having a worthy foe;

Once I believe there are no worthy foes, I have well-nigh forfeited my treasures.

Therefore,

When opposing forces are evenly matched,

The one who is saddened will be victorious.

A great warrior has said, "I dare not be the host, I would rather be the guest; I dare not advance an inch, I would rather retire a foot."

Now this I call filling in without marshalling the ranks; baring the arms without preparing to fight; grasping the sword without unsheathing it; and advancing upon the enemy without coming into conflict.

There is nothing so unfortunate as entering lightly into battle.

For in doing so we are in danger of losing that which is most precious.

Thus it happens that when opposing forces meet in battle, he who feels the pity of is assuredly conquers.

The Healing Purpose of Conflict

If you must oppose one another,

do it as a physician

nursing a body back to health,

never as an attacking general,

leading an army to victory.

To attack is to believe that your beloved

is the enemy you must conquer.

Your beloved is never the enemy.

Let your conflict be a source of revelation.

Learn the deeper, subtler, hidden aspects of each other.

This will be the victory

each of you is seeking.

Disagreement is natural,

conflict is part of human life.

But your relationship is not a war.

You do not have to win.

What you have to do is learn,

about your beloved,

and about yourself.

This is the primary purpose of conflict.

The strategists say: "I dare not take the offensive but I take the
defensive; I dare not advance an inch but I retreat a foot."

This means: To march without formation, To stretch one's arm without
showing it, To confront enemies without seeming to meet them, To hold
weapons without seeming to have them.

There is no greater disaster than to make light the enemy.

Therefore when armies are mobilized and issues joined, The man who is sorry over the fact will win.

The handbook
of the strategist has said:

'Do not invite the fight, accept it instead,'

'Better a foot behind than an inch too far ahead,'

Which means:

Look a man straight in the face and make no move,

Roll up your sleeve and clench no fist,

Open your hand and show no weapon,

Bare your breast and find no foe.

But as long as there be a foe, value him,

Respect him, measure him, be humble toward him;

Let him not strip from you, however strong he be,

Compassion, the one wealth which can afford him.

There is a saying in the military:

"I dare not attack but would rather retreat;

I dare not move forward an inch but would rather move back a foot."

This is called advancing without appearing to advance,

Making a resolution without rolling up your sleeves,

Carrying a weapon without revealing the weapon,

Preparing to fight without showing the preparation.

The biggest disaster is to underestimate the enemy;

Underestimating the enemy will cause you to lose all your armies.

When two fighting armies have similar strength, the side that is sorrowful and cautious will win.

The strategist par excellence says:

Dare not to be the aggressor but rather to be the defender.

Dare not to advance an inch but rather to retreat a foot.

This is called

Letting the opponent march toward nowhere to which to march,

Letting the opponent capture nothing to be captured,

Letting the opponent attack none to be attacked,

Letting the opponent arm with weapons for nothing for which to arm.

There is no greater calamity than underestimating your opponent.

To underestimate your opponent is surely to lose your treasures.

Therefore, when opposing forces are engaged in conflict,

The one who yields with caution will triumph in the end.

The ancient wise generals all held:

"Start no war.

Fight only when forced to.

A foot back instead of an inch forward."

Such military creeds all boil down to this:

Advance invisible ranks;

Raise invisible arms;

Poise invisible armies;

Fight as if one is not fighting with enemies.

The biggest military disaster is this:

To attack an enemy thoughtlessly

With threats, menaces and challenges.

For such an attack means the loss of all advantages.

When two armies battle, one against the other,

The army that fights out of love and sadness wins.

The military veteran has a saying, "rather then rushing in, it is better to wait to see what they will do".

They also say: "Rather than advancing an inch at great cost, it is better to retreat a foot and spare life".

This is advancing without wasting energy, effort and life.

It is like pushing back without using force.

Its semblance is that of engaging the enemy without actually invading them.

Surely there is no greater calamity in war than that of thinking too little of your enemy.

Underestimating him can lead to disaster and the loss of the three treasures of compassion,

economy and the desire not to be first.

When opposing armies clash in the field, the victory will go to the one with compassion for the people,

both his and the enemy's.

He who has the greatest economy in the use of all things will be able to better maintain the expenses of marches and provisions.

The desire not to be first will result in calculating actions, and the deferral of reckless abandon.

