===== Chapter 34 =====

The great Tao is a flood!

It can [go] left and right.

The ten-thousand things rely upon it for their livelihood

And it does not refuse them.

It achieves and accomplishes but has no prestige.

It clothes and rears the ten-thousand things

But does not act as lord [over them].

Always without desire, it can then be named "With the Lowly."

The ten-thousand things return there

And it does not act as lord [over them].

It can be named "Being Great."

Because it at no time takes itself to be great

Is the reason it can achieve its greatness.

Great Tao overflows. To the left To the right.

All beings owe their life to it And do not depart from it. It acts
without a name. It clothes and nourishes all beings But does not become
their master.

Enduring without desires, It may be called slight.

All beings return to it, But it does not become their master. It may be called immense.

By not making itself great, It can do great things.

Great Tao flows like a flood.

It can go left and right.

The myriad things depend on it for life

And it does not forsake them.

It does its work but lays claim to no merit.

It shields and nourishes the myriad things

And does not act as their lord.

Always desireless it may seem insignificant,

Yet the myriad things return to it

And it does not act as their lord.

Thus it may seem to be great.

The sage, too, does not strive to be great

So he is able to achieve greatness.

GREATNESS

The great Tao, flowing everywhere,

May go this way or that,

To the left or to the right.

All Things depending upon it for existence,

It is generous, no grace is withheld.

Silently and freely fulfilling its purpose and destiny,

It lays no possessive claim.

Nourishing and protecting All Things,

It has no desire to be master over them.

Without desire, asking for nothing,

Some may call it "The Small".

However, All Things belonging and returning to it -

Tho' it lays no claim to master them,

It is called "The Great".

Thus the Sage

Never making a show of greatness -

Manifests true greatness.

The great Tao is the cycle of life!

It can move to the left and to the right.*

Ten-thousand things (everything) rely upon it and it gives birth and does not refuse.

It deserves praise for the whole which cannot be named.

It clothes and nourishes ten-thousand things and does not act like a ruler.

It is always without deep seated desires.

Its name is associated with everything including the small.

Ten-thousand things revert to their original state, and from that place do not act as rulers.

The Name** becomes great because until the end, it is not great and does not act great.

Thus it can succeed in its greatness.

* Left and right = Being to the right of the ruler was considered a place of honor. Being to the left of the ruler was considered second best.

**The Name = The universe becoming conscious of itself through its human form.

THE METHOD OF ATTAINMENT

The Tao is immanent; it extendeth to the right hand as to the left.

All
things derive from it their being; it createth them, and all comply

with it. Its work is done, and it proclaimeth it not. It is the

ornament of all things, yet it claimeth not fief of them; there is

nothing so small that it inhabiteth not, and informeth it.

All things return without knowledge of the Cause thereof; there is

nothing so great that it inhabiteth not, and informeth it.

In
this manner also may the Sage perform his Works. It is by not

thrusting himself forward that he winneth to his success.

All-pervading is the Great Tao! It may be found on the left hand andon the right. All things depend on it for their production, which it givesto them, not one refusing obedience to it. When it gives to them, not onerefusing obedience to it. When its work is accomplished, it does not claimthe name of having done it. It clothes all things as with a garment, andmakes no assumption of being their lord;-it may be named in the smallestthings. All things return (to their root and disappear), and do not knowthat it is it which presides over their doing so;-it may be named in thegreatest things. Hence the sage is able (in the same way) to accomplishhis great achievements. It is through his not making himself great thathe can accomplish them.

That which makes everything exist, is present everywhere

It spreads itself throughout the entire Creation

Everything owes its existence to It, everything to its own nature

It gives everything for nothing

It cherishes and guards everything and everyone, but expects nothing in return

Because It does not wish for anything, It seems to be important

It makes everything appear and disappear again

But Itself is eternal

Therefore the one who is wise is modest

And because he is modest,

His actions are grand

Ultimate reality is all-pervasive; it is immanent everywhere.

All other things owe their existence to it and draw their sustenance from it, without anyone being refused. Having created and and nurtured them, it does not demand title to them. Even though it has provided for all, it refuses to dominate over a single one.

Since it asks nothing in return for its services, it may appear as of little worth.

But all things return home to it again, even though they do not know that they are being called home. Therefore it may be thought of as ultimate.

Since it never claims ultimacy for itself, it is, by that very fact, ultimate indeed.

Great Tao is like a boat that drifts;

It can go this way; it can go that.

The ten thousand creatures owe their existence to it and it does not disown them;

Yet having produced them, it does not take possession of them.

Makes no claim to be master over them,

(And asks for nothing from them.)

Therefore it may be called the Lowly.

The ten thousand creatures obey it,

Though they know not that they have a master;

Therefore it is called the Great.

So too the Sage just because he never at any time makes a show of greatness

In fact achieves greatness.

Great Tao flows everywhere,

left and right, all directions.

The ten thousand things depend on it

and it does not turn away.

Its purpose is fulfilled but it lays no claim.

It clothes and nourishes the ten thousand things

but is not their lord.

It desires nothing.

It is smaller than small.

The ten thousand things return to it

but it is not their master.

It is indeed great.

Because it knows nothing of greatness,

it is greater than great.

How the great way (is a) flood!

It is apt to go (both) left & right

The myriad beings trust this for life,

yet there are no explanations

The work is completed, in spite of distinctions & claims

The myriad beings are clothed & cared for

yet there is no assumption of leadership

Ever dispassionate, (it) invites a reputation for commonness

(But) the myriad beings return here,

and still there is no acting as master

Inviting a reputation for greatness

Because it never regards itself as great

So it is able to establish its greatness

Tao favours no one

The Tao flows and drifts everywhere,

both to the left and to the right.

It accomplishes its tasks and completes its affairs,

And yet for this it is not given a name.

The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it,

And yet it does not act as their master.

Thus it is constantly without desires.

It can be named with the things that are small.

The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it,

And yet it does not act as their master.

It can be named with the things that are great.

Therefore the Sage's ability to accomplish the great

Comes from his not playing the role of the great.

Therefore he is able to accomplish the great.

The great Tao floods and flows in every direction.

Everything in existence depends on it, and it doesn't deny them. It accomplishes its work without naming or making claims for itself. Everything in existence is clothed and nourished by it, but it doesn't lord over anything.

Aimless, ambitionless, it might be called "small."

Everything in existence returns to it, and still it doesn't lord over anything. Thus it might also be called "great."

Because it has no desire to be great, it can achieve greatness.

Sublime, the Cosmic Breath

That limitlessly pervades and imbues

Time and space, form and non-form.

It diffuses in every direction,

It flows through all being,

It creates and furthers all,

But makes no claim and takes no credit.

It is the body of transformation,

And we do not even know its name!

It loves and nourishes

The infinite family of forms,

But seeks not allegiance or submission.

Eternally free of abstraction,

Its name may be sought

Within the realm of the infinitesimal,

Though it is the origin and destiny

Of the vastest expressions of Nature.

It rejects aggrandizement,

And thus may be called great.

Just so, the student of the Sage:

He divorces his ego, repudiates elevation,

And rejects recognition:

Thus imbued, his achievement endures,

And his work is made great.

There is a natural, inherent greatness, which can be discovered by one who repudiates the false greatness of group identification. Greatness that must be sought or protected is not true greatness, but the empty elevation of ego. Lao Tzu uses this poem to help us feel the reality of true greatness: it does its work without claiming credit for it; it is free of abstraction and ideology; it turns away from any effort to aggrandize itself or its work. The fact is that our greatness is inborn: it is the treasure that is given to each individual at birth. The only way you could possibly miss it is by denying the invisible reality within you—by purchasing the ideological lie that says we are separate from the universe, superior to Nature. Discard the lie, and you will live your greatness.

The great Tao is everywhere, on all sides.

Everything derives from it;

nothing is rejected by it.

Through
Tao everything exists

yet it does not take possession.

It provides for everything

yet it does not lay claim.

Without
motive it seems small.

Being the source of everything it is great.

Because it never claims greatness,

its greatness shines brightly.

Supreme is the Tao! All pervasive; it can be on the left hand and on the right.

All things depend on it for life, and it denies none.

Its purposes accomplished, it claims no credit.

It clothes and fosters all things, but claims no lordship.

Ever desireless, it may be named "The Indivisible."

All things revert to it, but it claims no lordship. It may be named "The Supreme."

Because to the end it does not seek supremacy; it is able to accomplish great things.

The great Tao pervades everywhere, both on the left and on the right.

By it all things came into being, and it does not reject them. Merits accomplished, it does not possess them. It loves and nourishes all things but does not dominate over them.

It is always non-existent; therefore it can be named as small.

All things return home to it, and it does not claim mastery over them; therefore it can be named as great.

Because it never assumes greatness, therefore it can accomplish greatness.

The Great Guide

The great guide is everywhere!

Thus it can 'left' the 'right.'

The ten-thousand natural kinds depend on it and thus live.

And it does not phrase its guidance.

Success is achieved and not named as 'having.'

Supports and nourishes the ten-thousand natural kinds

and does not deem-act as lord.

Treating lack of desire as constant;

it can be named in the direction of 'small.'

The ten-thousand natural kinds return to it

and it does not deem-act as lord.

It can be named as 'great.'

With its ultimately not self-deeming as 'great'

Hence it is able to achieve its 'great.'

The magnificent Tao is all-pervading.

It may penetrate to either this side or that side.

All creatures abide with it and grow; none are excluded from it.

When its work is done, it does not demand merit.

It nurtures all things, but does not rule them.

When it is without intention, it may be called lesser.

When all things return to it, yet it does not possess them, it may be called greater.

Therefore, the wise does not endeavor to be great.

Hence, his attainment is great.

The Tao is floating everywhere, to the left and to the right.

The lives of the myriad creatures depend on it, no one can live without it.

It accomplishes its task, yet claims no honour.

It nourishes the myriad creatures, yet claims no possession.

It is always free from desire;

it can be called small.

The myriad creatures turn to it, yet it does not master them; it can be called great.

That is why the sage never boasts to be the great one, therefore he is the great one.

How the Tao overflows!

It may be found left and right.

The ten thousand things relying on it for their living,

It does not decline;

Having scored successes,

It claims no possession;

Clothing and feeding the ten thousand things,

It does not assume masterdom;

Meaning it is constantly lustless,

And may be named among the tiny.

When the ten thousand things return,

They do not know who their master is;

Hence, it may be named among the vast.

That is why the sage man

Was able to achieve vastness.

As he never assumed vastness,

He was able to achieve vastness.

The great Tao is in everything, both on the left and on the right.

Through it, all things come into being, and it does not abandon them.

When its work is completed, it does not possess them.

It loves and nurtures all things,

But does not rule them.

It never exists, so it can be called small, apparently.

All things return home to it,

And it does not claim to own them,

So it can be called great, apparently.

It never aspires to greatness,

And therefore it accomplishes greatness.

The way is broad, reaching left as well as right.

The myriad creatures depend on it for life yet it claims no authority.

It accomplishes its task yet lays claim to no merit.

It clothes and feeds the myriad creatures yet lays no claim to being their master.

For
ever free of desire, it can be called small;

Yet as it lays no claim to being master when the myriad creatures turn to it,
it can be called great.

It
is because it never attempts itself to become great that it succeeds in becoming
great.

Trust in its Perfection

How all-pervading is the great Reason! It can be on the left and it can be on the right.

The ten thousand things depend upon it for their life, and it refuses them not. When its merit is accomplished it assumes not the name. Lovingly it nourishes the ten thousand things and plays not the lord. Ever desireless it can be classed with the small. The ten thousand things return home to it. It plays not the lord. It can be classed with the great.

Therefore

The holy man unto death does not make himself great and can thus accomplish his greatness.

The Tao flows constantly like a river. All things arise in it, but are not separate. It brings about the natural sequence of things, but makes no effort. It nourishes the whole universe, but claims no reward. Everything relies on it, but it does not rely on anything. All things come and go, but it alone is; that is its greatness. It has no desire to be great, so its greatness is complete.

The Grand Direction permeates, left and right.

With myriad matters depending on it for growth, it declines none.

Accomplishing much, it accepts no limelight.

Nurturing myriad matters without claiming, it may be labeled Small;

Receiving myriad matters without claiming, it may be labeled Grand.

By not self-claiming Grand, it is thus Grand.

Way is vast, a flood

so utterly vast it's flowing everywhere.

The ten thousand things depend on it:

giving them life and never leaving them it performs wonders but remains nameless.

Feeding and clothing the ten thousand things

without ruling over them,

perennially that free of desire,

it's small in name.

And being what the ten thousand things return to

without ruling over them,

it's vast in name.

It never makes itself vast and so becomes utterly vast.

How the great Tao flows everywhere!

All things depend on it for life and it never turns away from them;

It completes the work successfully without seeking recognition;

It protects and nurtures all things without becoming their master.

Always devoid of desire may be an insignificant accomplishment;

All things follow it without becoming their master has to be a great accomplishment.

Just because it has no desire to be great,

It can achieve greatness.

Great
tao flowing everywhere

It can be left or right

All things depend on it yet exist yet without being denied.

Outstanding
service is performed without the presence of names

It clothes and cultivates the 10000 things

Yet without acting as lord.

With
entireness absent of desire

One can name in relation to smallness

The 10000 things merge and blend

Yet without action as lord one can name great actions.

What
is entirely without a self to act great happens

So it is able to perfect what is great.

The great Principle extends itself in all directions.

It lends itself willingly to the genesis of all beings (its participants). When a work is accomplished, it does not attribute it to itself. It nourishes all beings with kindness, without imposing itself on them as a master (for having nourished them; leaving them free; not exacting any degrading return from them).

Because of its constant disinterestedness, one might think it would become diminished. This is not so.

All beings to who it is so liberal, run towards it. It therefore finds itself magnified (through this universal trust).

The Sage imitates this conduct. He, also, makes himself small (through his disinterestedness and his delicate reserve), and acquires thereby true greatness.

The great Tao is like a flood

It can flow to the left or to the right

The myriad things depend on it for life, but it never stops

It achieves its work, but does not take credit

It clothes and feeds myriad things, but does not rule over them

Ever desiring nothing

It can be named insignificant

Myriad things return to it but it does not rule over them

It can be named great

Even in the end, it does not regard itself as great

That is how it can achieve its greatness

The great Tao is like a torrential flood. It flows everywhere like water. Left, right, up, down, over, under - there is no place it cannot go. It is the principle that permeates all of existence.

All living things depend on the Tao, because the Tao is the life force of the universe. It nurtures everyone and denies no one. It never stops, never pauses in its all-pervasive movement to drive life, growth, and evolution. The Tao moves forward and onward continuously.

Although the Tao is the ultimate cause of the miracle we call life, it accomplishes all of its work without needing to take credit, praise itself, or demand worship.

The nurturing aspect of the Tao protects and sustains all living things, but it does so without regarding itself as the lord of creation or ruler of the universe. It gives life to all creatures without elevating itself to a position of superiority.

The Tao is, after all, a transcendental force rather than a human-like entity. As such, it does not necessarily possess emotions. Thus, the Tao cannot be said to desire anything.

In a way, the Tao seems insignificant because it stays in the background. Its workings are subtle and imperceptible - easy for most people to overlook.

Even though all living things come from the Tao and must eventually return to it, it has no desire to dominate over them. It simply does what it does without requiring anything extra.

In a way, the Tao is great precisely because of its seeming insignificance. Even though it is often hidden from view and does not draw attention to itself, it is nevertheless the most fundamental force of reality. Many people are not aware of the Tao, and yet none of us can exist without it. Thus, the Tao is obscure and great at the same time.

In a similar way, the Tao is able to achieve its miraculous and often unnoticed greatness precisely because it does not regard itself as great. When everything is said and done, the true character of the Tao - its complete indifference to self-glorification or domination over all - inspires in us a sense of awe that is far beyond anything one can get out of fear-based theology.

THE PERFECTION OF TRUST

Great Tao is all pervading! It can be on both the right hand and the left. Everything relies upon it for their existence, and it does not fail them. It acquires merit but covets not the title. It lovingly nourishes everything, but does not claim the rights of ownership. It has no desires, it can be classed with the small. Everything returns to it, yet it does not claim the right of ownership. It can be classed with the great.

Therefore the wise man to the end will not pose as a great man, and by so doing will express his true greatness.

The great Tao floods over,

To the left, to the right.

Ten thousand beings live by it,

And it does not reject them.

Work is accomplished (ch'eng), yet it has no name.

It clothes and nourishes ten thousand beings,

But does not lord over them.

Always without desire,

It may be named the small;

Ten thousand beings return (kuei) to it,

Yet it does not lord over them,

It may be named the great.

Because it never considers itself great,

Therefore it can accomplish (ch'eng) its greatness.

The great Tao is everywhere, on all sides. Everything derives from it; nothing is rejected by it.

Through Tao everything exists yet it does not take possession. It provides for erverything yet it does not lay claim.

Without motive it seems small. Being the source of everything it is great. Because it never claims greatness, its greatness shines brightly.

The Tao is like an overflowing river.

It rises to the left and to the right.

The ten thousand things arise from it, but do not depart from it.

The Tao acts, but cannot be defined.

It clothes and nourishes all beings, but does not rule over them.

It endures without desire and without seeming "big."

The ten thousand things find their home in it, and yet it does not exercise lordship over them.

The Tao is very great, but it does not show its greatness.

Therefore, it is truly great.

Thirty-four

The great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left and to the right.

The ten thousand things depend upon it; it holds nothing back.

It fulfills its purpose silently and makes no claim.

It nourishes the ten thousand things,

And yet is not their lord.

It has no aim; it is very small.

The
ten thousand things return to it,

Yet it is not their lord.

It is very great.

It
does not show greatness,

And is therefore truly great.

The great Tao is felt everywhere

Extending in all directions.

All things grow on it and it never declines them.

It accomplishes its great task without claiming to merit.

It breeds all things without claiming to be their master;

It can be called the Small.

All things finally return to it

And it never claims to be their master;

And it can be called the Great.

It becomes the Great

Because it never claims to be the Great.

The great Tao overflows left and right,

The ten thousand things depend on it for their lives, and it never disowns them.

Its work is done, but it has no name.

It clothes and nurtures the ten thousand things, yet it makes no claim to be lord over them.

It is always free of desire.

It may be called small.

The ten thousand things return to it, yet it makes no claim to be lord over them.

It may be called great.

Because it never regards itself as great,

It can accomplish its greatness.

The great Dao flows everywhere.

It goes to the right and it goes to the left.

Myriad beings depend on it to survive,

But it does not interfere with them.

It facilitates but does not gloat.

It nourishes everything, but does not exert control.

Dao has no goal and appears to be insignificant.

Nevertheless, everything relies on it for sustenance, but it exerts no control.

Such action seems to be magnificently great.

Dao has no intention to be great, yet it attains greatness.

Natural Perfection

Ren Ch'eng

The Great Tao is all pervasive;

It could be on your right or on your left.

The ten thousand things depend on it for growth,

And it never lets them down.

It achieves success but is not possessive.

It enfolds and nourishes the ten thousand things,

Yet it does not claim ownership.

Always desireless and covetous of nothing,

It could be termed small.

But as the ten thousand things return to it,

And it does not care to be their lord,

It could be termed great.

Thus the Sage never in life tries to be great,

And for this very reason becomes truly great.

The great Tao flows in all directions:

To left, to right, at the same time.

To it all things owe their existence, for it rejects none.

Throught it all things are brought to perfection, but it lays no claim to them.

It clothes and nourishes them, but does not claim mastery over them.

Because it at no time makes demands on them, we may class it with the humble;

Because all things return home to it - and still it does not play the master - we may name it Supreme.

Thus it is with the Sage;

He never prides himself on greatness;

Therefore he achieves greatness.

The great Tao flow everywhere:

It can go to the right or the left.

The ten thousand things draw life from it,

And it does not deny them.

It completes its work

But takes no title.

It clothes and feeds the ten thousand things,

But does not own them.

You can call it small.

The ten thousand things return to it,

But it does not own them.

You can call it great.

Because it does not seek to be great,

Its greatness is accomplished.

The subtle essence of the universe is omnipresent.

It may go to the left or the right.

All things derive their life from it,

and it holds nothing back from them,

yet it takes possession of nothing.

It accomplishes its purpose,

but it claims no merit.

It clothes and feeds all,

but has no ambition to be master over anyone.

Thus it may be regarded as "the Small."

All things return to it, and it contains them,

yet it claims no authority over them.

Thus it may be recognized as "the Great."

The wise one who never attempts to be emotionally great and who accomplishes each small task with full devotion,

as if it were the greatest of tasks, is naturally recognized as great.

XXXIV.

True
Perfection

Great
Tao is all-pervading,

At
once on left and right

It
may be found, and all things wait

On it
for life and light.

No one
is refused the gift,

And
when the work is done

It
does not take the name of it,

Nor
claim the merit won.

All
things it loves and nurses,

But
does not strive to own,

Has
no
desires, and can be named

With
the tiniest ever known.

All
things return home to it,

But
it does not strive to own,

And
can be named with the mightiest,

For
it is the Tao alone.

And
thus the sage is able

To
accomplish his great deeds,

To
the
end
he claims no greatness,

And
his great work thus succeeds.

Great Tao flows everywhere,

It extends to the left and to the right.

All beings receive It in order to live and be free.

It works out perfectness in them although It possesses not a Name.

It protects them with love and sustains them, but does not claim to be Ruler of their actions.

Always seeking the innermost, you may say that Its Name is in the Small.

All beings return again into It, yet It does not claim to be Ruler of their actions.

You may say that Its Name is in the Great.

That is why, to the end of his life, the self-controlled man is not great in action,

Thus he is able to perfect his greatness.

The
Great Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

is
universal like a flood.

How
can it be turned

to
the right

or
to the left?

All
creatures depend on it,

and
it denies nothing to anyone.

It
does its work,

But
it makes no claims for itself.

It
clothes and feeds all,

But
it does not rule them

:
Thus, it may be called

"the
Little."

All
things return to it

as
to their home,

But
it does not rule them:

It
may be called

"the
Great."

It
is just because it

does
not wish to be great

That
its greatness

is
fully realized.

The
Complete Thinker

would
not control the world;

They
are in harmony

with
the world.

How ambiguous is the great Way! It may go left or it may go right.

The ten thousand things depend on it for their existence, and it denies them not.

When a work has been completed, it does not appropriate it.

It clothes and nourishes the ten thousand things, but it does not act as their master.

It may be named with the smallest things.

The ten thousand things revert to it, but it does not act as their master.

It may be named with the greatest things.

Because it never asserts its own greatness, therefore it is able to achieve its proper greatness.

All-pervading is the Great Tao! It may be found on the left

hand and on the right.

All
things depend on it for their production, which it gives to

them, not one refusing obedience to it. When its work is

accomplished, it does not claim the name of having done it. It

clothes all things as with a garment, and makes no assumption of being

their lord;--it may be named in the smallest things. All things

return (to their root and disappear), and do not know that it is it

which presides over their doing so;--it may be named in the greatest

things.

Hence
the sage is able (in the same way) to accomplish his great

achievements. It is through his not making himself great that he can

accomplish them.

Rippling art THOU, to the left and the right!
All tasks completed, all
affairs finished,
still it does not claim them for itself.
The myriad
creatures return to it,
but it does not act as their ruler.

Eternally
without 'personal motivations'
it may be named among the small;
the
myriad creatures return to it
though it does not 'order' them to.
It
may thus be named among the Great.
In
this way, Sages can achieve 'greatness;'
by not acting 'great:' therefore
they may be named among the Great.

The
empty center's everywhere

It flows both left and right

It brings to pass ten thousand things

And yet it never leaves your sight

It
welcomes everything around

On nothing does it make a claim

It's in the heart of each and all

This ultimate without a name

Some
can see that it is great

And some will say that it's obscure

It is your real identity

Simplicity that will endure

THE Great Tao is universal like a flood.

How can it be turned to the right or to the left?

All creatures depend on it,

And it denies nothing to anyone.

It does its work,

But it makes no claims for itself.

It clothes and feeds all,

But it does not lord it over them:

Thus, it may be called "the Little."

All things return to it as to their home,

But it does not lord it over them:

Thus, it may be called "the Great."

It is just because it does not wish to be great

That its greatness is fully realised.

The Tao flows all around like a great river,

To the left and to the right it surrounds all.

It gives rise to all, and nourishes and clothes them, but lays no intention on control.

It is merged in all things, and hidden in their inner being;

Thus it may be termed small.

All things return to it at the end of life;

Thus it is called great.

The sage models himself after the Tao,

Unburdened, not striving, content with what is.

The great Tao flows unobstructed in every direction.

All things rely on it to conceive and be born,

and it does not deny even the smallest of creation.

When it has accomplished great wonders,

it does not claim them for itself.

It nourishes infinite worlds,

yet it doesn't seek to master the smallest creature.

Since it is without wants and desires,

it can be considered humble.

All of creation seeks it for refuge

yet it does not seek to master or control.

Because it does not seek greatness;

it is able to accomplish truly great things.

The single principle can be found everywhere, all the time. Everything works according to it. Every life unfolds according to it. The single principle does not say yes to this and no to that.

Even though Tao is the source of all growth and development, nothing profits Tao. Tao benefits all without return and without prejudice.

Neither is the single principle private property. You cannot own it. It does not own you.

Its greatness lies in its universality. It is all inclusive.

The wise leader follows this principle and does not act selfishly. The leader does not accept one person and refuse to work with another. The leader does not own people or control their lives. Leadership is not a matter of winning.

The work done in order to shed the light of awareness on whatever is happening: also, selfless service, without prejudice, available to all.

The great Tao flows everywhere, to the left and to the right.

All things rely on it for their life

and it does not refuse them.

When its work is done, it does not demand recognition.

It clothes and nourishes All things

and does not demand allegiance.

Since it makes no demands for itself, it can seem to be of smal regard.

Yet as All things return to it of their own accord, without being commanded,

it can truly be regarded Great.

It is only because it does not claim to be Great

That it is able to achieve such Greatness.

Infinity
permeates everything in every direction;

to the left as well as to the right.

It is the potential of all things,

and the manifestation of all things.

Its total essence resides in all things.

It
has no purpose.

It is complete in its indifference.

It manifests and disintegrates all things forever.

It
sustains all things,

yet it is the god of no thing.

It has no purpose.

It is Infinitely insignificant.

All
manifestations after a time disintegrate back

into It,

yet It is the god of no thing.

It
permeates everything

and so there is nothing outside its realm.

It
cannot appear great

because it is at one with everything.

Great Tao is everywhere, to the left and to the right.

All things depend on it for life, and are not denied.

Nameless, it does its work.

It feeds and clothes all things, but is not their Master.

It has no desires, so its Name is little known.

All things return to it, but it is not their Master;

therefore its Name is Great.

All it does is not for its own Greatness.

Thus does it achieve Greatness.

The great Tao flows everywhere,

Going to the left and to the right.

The Ten Thousand Things depend upon it for life;

It denies itself to none of them,

Accomplishing its task

But claiming no credit.

It clothes and feeds the Ten Thousand Things,

Yet does not claim to be their master.

Forever without desire, it may be called small.

The Ten Thousand Things return to it,

Yet it does not claim possession over them:

Thus it may be called great.

Because it never strives for greatness,

It thereby accomplishes greatness.

The Way extends and expands.

One is in it wherever one is.

By trusting it, all beings grow and develop.

The Way enables successes but possesses no name.

It provides for all but rules over nothing.

It is free of personal desires

And can therefore be named as insignificant.

It is obeyed by all, though it has no political power.

Therefore, it can be named as the greatest.

One who never wants to be great can therefore grow great.

Great Tao drifts - it can go right or go left.

The thousands of things depend on it for life, it rejects nothing. It achieves successes, but does not hold tight to the fame. It clothes and feeds the thousands of things but does not act the ruler.

Always: Desiring nothing, it can be called 'of no account.'

The thousands of things turn back to it but it does not act the ruler - it can be called 'Great'

Because in the end it does not insist on its own greatness, yes, it is able to achieve its full greatness.

The Eternal Tao pervades everything. It is present to the left and to the right. Thanks to It, souls arise, live, and develop.

Though Tao is so great and performs so great work — It does not want to glorify Itself.

It raises all beings with love. It does not exert violence over them. It does not insist that people realize all Its desires.

It is Great though It does not insist on this.

Wise people aspire to It — to the Great.

Tao contains the whole Universe.

All things come out of Tao.

It doesn't reject anybody or anything.

He
who is on the Tao Way is a creator,

But doesn't take possession of the creation.

He is generous, but doesn't look for gratitude of people.

Without own desires, he isn't easily noticed.

He does good things without taking merits.

Not displaying his greatness, the Wise Person is great indeed.

The
great Dao reaches everywhere without regard to direction. The myriad creatures
depend on it to reproduce themselves and be born, and none are denied. When
accomplishments are made [the Dao] does not claim them. It feeds and clothes
the myriad creatures and does not act as their master. Constantly without desire
[in regard of the myriad creatures] it can be called insignificant. The myriad
creatures take refuge therein and yet it does not act as their master, so it
can be called great. Because it never takes itself to be great it can therefore
accomplish its own greatness.

The great Tao overflows,

able to move left and right.

All things rely on it for life,

But it does not dominate them.

Completing its task without possession,

Clothing and feeding all things,

Without wanting to be their master.

Always void of desire,

It can be called Small.

All things return to it

Without its being their master;

It can be called Great.

Just because the Sage would never regard himself as great,

He is able to attain his own greatness.

The Evolving Tao

The Great Tao extends everywhere.

It is on the left and the right.

All Things depend on it for growth,

And it does not deny them.

It achieves its purpose,

And it does not have a name.

It clothes and cultivates All Things,

And it does not act as master.

Always without desire,

It can be named Small.

All Things merge with it,

And it does not act as master.

It can be named Great.

In the end it does not seek greatness,

And in that way the Great is achieved.

The Dao is like the river behind you. It creates life where it travels, but does not take credit. It nourishes the fish that swim in it, but doesn't possess them. Man and beast take refreshment and sustenance from it and it never ends. It is therefore great. But it doesn't think so.

O the great Way o'erflows

And spreads on every side!

All beings come from it;

No creature is denied.

But having called them forth,

It calls not one its own.

It feeds and clothes them all

And will not be their lord.

Without desire always,

It seems of slight import.

Yet, nonetheless, in this

Its greatness still appears:

When they return to it,

No creature meets a lord.

The
Wise Man, therefore, while he is alive,

Will never make a show of being great:

And that is how his greatness is achieved.

The great Tao is like a river overflowing,

It can go left, it can go right.

All things owe their existence to it,

But it never interferes with them.

When its work is accomplished, it is unable to say where its credit is.

It protects and nourishes, but it does not claim to be master over them.

Always without its desire, it may be called small.

All things come to it as their home,

And yet it does not pose as their master.

It may be called great.

It is precisely because it never claims to be great, that it can achieve its greatness.

The way the great Dao floods, oh, it can go left or right.

The myriad folk rely on it for life, but it does not tell them to do so.

It achieves success but enjoys no reputation for doing so.

It clothes and feeds the myriad folk but does not become their master.

It is always without desire and so can be named among the small.

The myriad things return to it, but it does not become their master, so it can be named among the great.

Therefore it is because he himself never tries to be great that he fulfills his greatness.

1. The Way floats and drifts;

2. It can go left or right.

3. It accomplishes its tasks and completes its affairs, and yet for this it
is not given a name.

4. The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it, and yet it does not act
as their master.

5. Thus it is constantly without desires.

6. It can be named with the things that are small.

7. The ten thousand things entrust their lives to it, and yet it does not not
act as their master.

8. It can be named with the things that are great.

9.
Therefore the Sage's ability to accomplish the great

10. Comes from his not playing the role of the great.

11. Therefore he is able to accomplish the great.

Tao flows in
all directions.

It's in everything, but nothing can contain it.

Everything needs Tao,

so Tao provides,

and never takes credit for its work.

Everything comes
from Tao,

but Tao doesn't call attention to itself.

It wants for nothing. Think nothing of it.

Everything leads
to Tao,

but Tao still doesn't call attention to itself.

Pretty impressive, huh?

It doesn't strive
for success. That's why it succeeds.

.

The Great Way

The great Way flows everywhere, both left and right.

All things derive their life from it,

and it does not turn away from them.

It accomplishes its work, but does not take possession.

It provides for and nourishes everything,

but does not control them.

Always without desires, it may be considered small.

The destination of all things, yet claiming nothing,

it may be considered great.

Because it never claims greatness,

its greatness is achieved.

The Great TAO is all pervading All-present and All-effective.

All beings live out of It.

Never failing It does not refuse Itself to anyone.

It furthers without demanding

And dispenses Right without judging.

That It is undemanding and unattainable is Its nothingness.

That It is All-embracing and intangible is Its greatness.

Likewise the Awakened Man:

That he does not impose his will but lets Tao will through him in his nothingness.

That Tao fills him and acts through him is his greatness.

The Great Tao Flows Everywhere

Lao Tze says,

The great Tao flows everywhere.

There is no discrimination of what is the right and what is the left.

All existence lives up to it, and it denies no one.

It doesn't claim credit, though there is achievement.

It loves and nourishes all existence but does not lord over them.

It appears ambitionless and is regarded as less important.

All existence returns to it, and it doesn't dominate them.

Certainly this is great.

This is the reason that the sage never regards himself as great,

thus he deserves to be titled as great.

WITHOUT CONTRIVING

All
things may act, without exclusion,

according to the natural way,

which fulfills its purpose silently,

and with no claim.

Being an aspect of natural order,

it is not the ruler of any thing,

but remains the source of their nourishment.

It cannot be seen; it has no intention,

but all natural things rely on its presence.

When all things return to it,

it does not enslave them,

so unmanifested, its greatness prevails.

Modelling
himself upon the Tao,

he who is wise, does not contrive,

but is content with what he achieves.

The great Tao flows everywhere.

All things are born from it,

yet it doesn't create them.

It pours itself into its work,

yet it makes no claim.

It nourishes infinite worlds,

yet it doesn't hold on to them.

Since it is merged with all things

and hidden in their hearts,

it can be called humble.

Since all things vanish into it

and it alone endures,

it can be called great.

It isn't aware of its greatness;

thus it is truly great.

How all-pervading the superior Dao is!

It could be on the left, it could be on the right.

Upon it the life of all things depends and it does not deny anyone.

It accomplishes merits but it does not possess fame.

It shields and nourishes All Things but it does not lord over them.

It may be called the Superior.

Hence, a Sage ruler never wishes to be superior.

Therefore he eventually became superior.

As the Tao is all-pervading,

It operates on both the left and the right.

Success is consequent to all affairs.

It does not proclaim its own existence.

All things return.

Yet there is no claim of ownership,

So it is forever desireless.

This can be called small.

All things return.

Yet there is no claim of ownership,

This can he called great.

The sage accomplishes greatness in not acting great.

Thus can he accomplished what is great.

XXXIV

The
tao floats and drifts whichever way it likes

It does what it wants, without proclaiming itself

All things depend on it, but it is not their master

It has no desire, and thus is small

Yet since all things depend on it, and it does not rule them

It is magnificent

So
the taoist attempts great works with no thought of being great

And thus accomplishes his ends

The Great Way is Universal;

The Great Way is universal

it can apply to the left or the right.

All beings depend on it for life,

and it does not refuse.

Its accomplishments fulfilled,

it does not dwell on them.

It lovingly nurtures all beings,

but does not act as their ruler.

As it has no desire, it can be called small.

As all beings take to it,

yet it does not act as their ruler,

it can be called great.

Therefore sages never contrive greatness;

that is why they can become so great.

Tao is everywhere.

It can be guidance.

Everything lives depending on it without exception, With such accomplishment, it claims none.

Providing clothing and food to everything, it does not govern them: this is called lowliness.

Guiding everything, it does not master, this can be called greatness.

Because it does not proclaim to be great, it can actually be great.

The great Way is all-pervading, it can reach the right or the left.

All things depend on it, and none is excluded.

It does its work, but it makes no claims for itself.

It clothes and feeds all things, but it makes no claims to be their master.

Because it does not have desire, it may be called "the little."

All things return to it as to their home, but it does not lord over them: Thus, it may be called "the great."

It is just because it does not attempt to be great that its greatness is fully realized.

The great Tao flows, to the left, to the right,

everything arises from it.

Fulfills its purpose, making no claim.

Nourishes everything, yet not their lord.

It has no claim, could name it minute (lowly).

Everything returns to it, could name it Great.

By not showing its greatness, it could be truly great.

The great Tao covers everything like a flood.

lt flows to the left and to the right.

The ten thousand things depend upon it

and it denies none of them.

It accomplishes its task yet claims no reward.

It clothes and feeds the ten thousand things

yet it does not attempt to control them.

Therefore, it may be called "the little."

The
ten thousand things return to it,

even though it does not control them.

Therefore, it may be called "the great."

So
it is that the True Person does not wish to be great

and therefore becomes truly great.

The
follower of the way

is like a hawk

drifting

on unseen currents

back and forth

up and down.

All beings and things

are connected to it

solid or gas

bad or good

fact or fiction

sexual or neuter

nothing is denied

nor is anything controlled.

The way,

although existing in everything,

controls nothing

and seems nonexistent.

Everything
follows it

although none of us know how

so it must be something great.

Quality
is known

by the lack of its demonstration.

Some great dao can flow everywhere. Like a flood it can go left or right. Like
a drifting boat it can go this way or that.

All things [eventually] derive their life from it. It hardly denies or disowns
them.

It accomplishes its task, but seem to claim no credit for it. It hardly takes
possession of anyone, either.

So though it covers all there is like some garment, it hardly takes possession.
It can clothe and feed all beings but hardly claims to be guru over them.

Therefore it can perhaps be called low and quite free from insignificant desires.

To turn into the home of all things, dont make any outer claims. (Implied; cf.
Y)

See into how dao is by non-desiring empty mind. (Cf. Y)

Ten thousand [hungry] creatures obey a dao master and his ways, though they
hardly understand it or how. Dao is called great. And the man who lives it or
a dao repertoire is called great as well.

The wise man never strives [verbally] for the great. To the end the wise dao
man doesn't claim any outer greatness. Thus [some degree of subtle Vossa-] greatness
is installed.

And the wise man never at any time hardly ever makes a show of greatness. By
such a dogged, keen strategy some [clowns] achieves greatness.

Rippling is the Way, flowing left and right!

Its tasks completed, its affairs finished,

Still it does not claim them for its own.

The myriad creatures return to it,

But it does not act as their ruler.

Eternally without desire,

It may be named among the small;

The myriad creatures return to it,

But it does not act as their ruler;

It may be named among the great.

For these reasons,

The sage can achieve greatness,

Because he does not act great.

Therefore,

He can achieve greatness.

Mighty Tao is all pervading.

It is simultaneously on this side and on that.

All living things subsist from it, and all are in its care.

It works, it finishes, and knows not the name of merit.

In love it nurtures all things, and claims no excellence therein.

It knows neither ambition nor desire.

It can be classed with the humblest of things.

All things finally revert to it, and it is not thereby increased.

It can be mentioned with the greatest of things.

Thus does the wise man continually refrain from self-distinction.

The Way You Treat Each Other

The love you give each other

can be your greatest service.

Like ripples in a pond

your love spreads out in circles

and changes all it touches.

The way you treat each other

becomes the way you treat all things.

I have met many people

who love their important causes

but treat those closest to them

with contempt.

If you wish to live lives of service

learn to cherish each other fully.

This will lead not to self-absorption

but to greater compassion for all.

The Great Tao flows everywhere. It may go left or right.

All things depend on it for life, and it does not turn away from them.
It accomplishes its task, but does not claim credit for it. It clothes
and feeds all things but does not claim to be master over them.

Always without desires it may be called the Small.

All things come to it and it does not master them; it may be called the Great.

Therefore (the sage) never strives himself for the great, and thereby the great is achieved.

Bountiful life,
letting anyone attend,

Making no distinction between left or right.

Feeding everyone, refusing no one,

Has not provided this bounty to show how much it owns,

Has not fed and clad its guests with any thought of claim;

And, because it lacks the twist

Of mind or body in what it has done,

The guile of head or hands,

Is not always respected by a guest.

Others appreciate welcome from the perfect host

Who, barely appearing to exist,

Exists the most.

The big DAO is like a flood, going everywhere.

Everything depends on it to grow, but it never refuses to help.

When things are accomplished, it never claims credit.

It nurtures everything, but never tries to control them.

It never has desires, so it can be called the SMALL.

Everything depends on it, but it never tries to be their master, so it can be called the BIG.

Only because it never wants to be the BIG, so it becomes the BIG.

The Great Tao overflows everywhere in the universe.

It suffuses with life all beings that depend on it for their existence.

It accomplishes everything while remaining nameless.

It nurtures everything while claiming no mastership.

It desires nothing for itself, and is therefore called the Small.

It is the source whereto everything returns, and is therefore called the Vast.

Thus, the sage never thinks of claiming greatness for himself,

Yet, for this very reason, achieves true greatness.

The Way extends and expands.

One is in it wherever one is.

By trusting it, all beings grow and develop.

The Way enables successes but possesses no name.

It provides for all but rules over nothing.

It is free of personal desires

And can therefore be named as insignificant.

It is obeyed by all, though it has no political power.

Therefore, it can be named as the greatest.

One who never wants to be great can therefore grow great.

The Tao flows all around like a great river,

To the left and to the right it surrounds all.

It gives rise to all, and nourishes and clothes them, but lays no intention on control.

It is merged in all things, and hidden in their inner being;

Thus it may be termed small.

All things return to it at the end of life;

Thus it is called great.

The sage models himself after the Tao,

Unburdened, not striving, content with what is.

