===== Chapter 30 =====

Those rulers who use the Tao to assist mankind

Do not use soldiers to force the world.

Those doings can be paid back [to them].

The place of the army's encampment—

Thorns and brambles grow there.

In the wake of the military

There indeed exists a famine-year.

The good have success and stop

Not daring thereby to grab for power.

[They] succeed but never boast.

Succeed but never strike down.

Succeed but never arrogantly.

Succeed but do not gain thereafter.

Succeed but never force.

A strong thing ruling over what is Old—

This is called "non-Tao."

The non-Tao soon ends.

Use Tao to help rule people. This world has no need for weapons, Which soon turn on themselves.

Where armies camp, nettles grow. After each war, years of famine.

The most fruitful outcome Does not depend on force,

But succeeds without arrogance Without hostility Without Pride Without resistance Without violence.

If these things prosper and grow old, This is called not-Tao. Not-Tao soon ends.

When the follower of Tao assists the ruler,

He'll advise him

Not to conquer the world with the force of arms.

Such actions will certainly rebound.

Thistles spring up where armies camp.

Bad harvests follow in the wake of great wars.

Attain your goal, then stop

And do not abuse your force.

Attain your goal without boasting.

Attain your goal without bragging.

Attain your goal without pride.

Attain your goal without gain.

Attain your goal without violence.

What expands too much is bound to collapse.

This is not the way of Tao.

What goes against Tao soon declines.

USE OF FORCE

The wise leader of people, in following ,the Tao,

Conquers without using force of arms,

For it is in the nature of direct force to rebound

- violence begetting violence,

repaying the wielder in kind.

Knowing that forceful conflict produces

a battleground of thorns and bramble extending far beyond the point of conflict,

It is inevitable that conflict be followed by great famine and deprivation.

A wise leader effects the purpose at hand, and stops -

Not continuing the use of power for its own sake.

Achieving the purpose:

- Does not brag about it.

- Does not boast of it.

- Does not take pride in it.

- Considers any conflict an unavoidable and regrettable necessity.

- Does not delight in domination

and violence.

Knowing that loss follows gain,

decay follows vigor

and that violence is not consistent with the Tao,

Then that which is inconsistent with the Tao,

Must in time, perish.

With the Tao guiding the people the rulers do not have a reason to use weapons and violence.

Heaven below's (sacred body's) activities will return to the highest degree.

The master knows when to stop, for brambles and thorny bushes live there.

Great battles are postponed, or surely there would be disaster for years.

The results are good when one does not venture to rule by force.

They succeed yet do not brag.

They succeed yet do not destroy.

They succeed yet are not arrogant.

They succeed yet do not possess!

They succeed yet do not overpower.

Life flourishes and then decays.

This is sometimes spoken of as not the Tao.

Not the Tao is when life ends before its time.

A WARNING AGAINST WAR

If a king summon to his aid a Master of the Tao, let Him not advise

recourse to arms. Such action certainly bringeth the corresponding

reaction.

Where
armies are, are weeds. Bad harvests follow great hosts.

The
good general striketh decisively, once and for all. He does not

risk by overboldness. He striketh, but doth not vaunt his victory. He

striketh according to strict law of necessity, not from desire of victory

Things
become strong and ripe, then age. This is discord with the

Tao; and what is not at one with the Tao soon cometh to an end.

Whoever advises the ruler in the spirit of Tao will avoid rule by forceof arms: force begets force. Where armies are arrayed against each other,grow thistle and thorn. Wars are the parents of hunger and misery. TheSage wants peace, nothing else, he aspires never for conquest. He is victoriousin restraint, victorious with arrogance, victorious without presumption,victorious without demonstration and offense. Whoever seeks military adventureswill perish in them. Such is the fate of rapaciousness. Such is the fateof materialism.

One who advocates a righteous world, uses no violence

Because One who uses violence, provokes violence

And where discord rules there is chaos

And after times of conflict lean years will follow

The righteous one does what he can and forces nothing

Is not proud about what he achieves

Does not brag about what he achieves

Does not boast about what he achieves

He only does what he does because that's all he can do

And he never uses power or violence

Civilizations which have reached their peaks

Usher in their decay

Civilizations are unnatural

And what's unnatural, will perish

Whoever tries to help Nature run itself does not need to use force. For force will be met with force, and wherever force is used fighting and devastation follows.

After the battle come years of destitution.

He who is wise lets well enough alone. He does not press a victory by further conquest.

When peace has been restored, he does not behave like an arrogant victor. When security has been regained, he does not gloat like a conqueror. When he gets what he needs, he does not destroy those who have been defeated. Whenever he does something which he has to do, he does it without cruelty.

When things reach maturity, they decay of themselves. So cruelty is unnatural. Whoever acts unnaturally will come to an unnatural finish.

He who by Tao purposes to help a ruler of men

Will oppose all conquest by force of arms;

For such things are wont to rebound.

Where armies are, thorn and brambles grow.

The raising of a great host

Is followed by a year of dearth.

Therefore a good general effects his purpose and then stops; he does not take further advantage of his victory.

Fulfils his purpose and does not glory in what he has done;

Fulfils his purpose and does not boast of what he has done;

Fulfils his purpose, but takes no pride in what he has done;

Fulfils his purpose, but only as a step that could not be avoided.

Fulfils his purpose, but without violence;

For what has a time of vigour also has a time of decay.

This is against Tao,

And what is against Tao will soon perish.

When counseling rulers, observers of Tao do not advise force.

This is certain to bring consequences.

Where great armies have passed, thorn bushes thrive.

Famine follows in the wake of war.

A good ruler does only what is necessary to achieve results.

He does not abuse position.

Achieve results, but do not glory in them.

Achieve results, but do not boast.

Achieve results, but be not proud.

Achieve results because there is no choice.

Achieve results but do not overpower.

Doing more than necessary brings exhaustion.

This is not in harmony with Tao.

What is not in harmony with Tao soon perishes.

Those who use the way to help with human government

Do not use arms (or) force on the world

Such efforts tend to recoil

(In) a place where an army has camped

Thorns and brambles grow now

A great army's aftermath is sure to bring bad harvests

Those who are competent succeed and then stop

Not daring (or) thinking to take by force

Succeed but do not glorify

Succeed but with no aggression

Succeed but with no arrogance

Succeed even not having gained the end

Succeed but do not dominate

A being grown mighty will then grow frail

This may be called "off the path"

Off the path is soon finished

Violence

Those which advise their ruler in the way of Tao,

Do not use weapons to commit violence in the world.

Such deeds easily rebounds.

In places where armies are stationed,

Thorns and brambles will grow.

The good general achieves his result and that is all;

He does not use the occasion to seize strength from it.

He achieves his result, but does not become arrogant.

He achieves his result, but does not praise his deeds.

He achieves his result, and yet does not brag.

He achieves his results, yet he abides with the result

Because he has no choice.

This is called "Achieving one's result without using violence".

When things reach their prime, they get old;

We call this "Not the way of Tao".

What is not the way of Tao

Will come to an early end.

Those who wish to use Tao to influence others don't rely on force or weapons or military strategies. Force rebounds.

Weapons turn on their wielders. Battles are inevitably followed by famines.

Just do what needs to be done, and then stop. Attain your purpose, but don't pres your advantage.

Be resolute, but don't boast. Succeed, but don't crow. Accomplish, but don't overpower.

Overdoing things invites decay, and this is against Tao. Whatever is against Tao soon ceases to be.

Leaders, rulers, governors of the people:

The Cosmos offers you helping Presences,

Whose essence dwells in harmony,

And not in the use of force or weaponry.

Natural law decrees that violence backfires

Upon all who resort to its means.

Armed forces camp and crawl

Amid thorns and brambles,

Which grow like cancer and close like traps.

Wherever group violence is done,

Desolation walks in its wake.

Truly, the harvest of violence is misery.

The best leader is himself led-

He builds consensus, achieves his aim,

And then departs.

Force and intimidation

Are neither his means nor his end.

He is inwardly firm, without display.

He is inwardly firm, without arrogance.

He is inwardly firm, without contempt.

He is inwardly firm, without demand.

He is inwardly firm, without violence.

Aggrandize yourself or your group,

And you have chosen the path of decadence.

This is called separation from the Source.

To separate from the Source

Is the way of swift and certain death.

Chapters 30 and 31 may be read as a unit, for they comprise the poet's teaching on violence, in the context of war and battle. Lao Tzu begins with a critical point, which distinguishes him and his teaching from the position of mere pacifism. As always with Lao Tzu, the point has a practical direction. He is not simply waving a flower and saying, "war is bad, man, and peace is good"; he is saying "war is totally unnecessary, because there's a natural way of resolving conflict that is far more effective." If those with the power to govern people and send armies into harm's way would simply recognize the helping presences of the invisible realm of being, then they would instantly realize that those presences are a far more practical alternative than the most powerful army imaginable.

This leads the poet into a discussion of natural law: violence inevitably finds its way back to those who use it to achieve the delusory goals of group allegiance. This is the law of the fall of empires and the death of civilizations guided by the use of power and aggrandizement. The natural leader is himself a follower—a follower of the Sage; thus his action is guided by Modesty, and his inner firmness is made manifest, yet without force, display, or violence. He does not set himself or his nation against the Source of their being, for the natural leader understands that tyranny and murder are relentlessly suicidal, for both the leader and his nation.

Tao in War

Whoever
advises a ruler according to Tao

opposes conquest by war.

Policies of war tend to rebound.

Where the armies march, brambles grow.

Whenever a great army is formed,

hunger and evil follow.

So,
a wise general achieves his goal and stops;

he does not battle beyond victory.

He wins, but does not boast of it;

he wins, but does not celebrate it;

he wins, but does not revel in the spoils;

he wins, for it is his duty to win;

he wins, but not from love of violence.

Things
reach their peak, then decline.

Violence opposes Tao.

Whoever opposes Tao dies early.

When one uses the Tao in assisting his sovereign, he will not employ arms to coerce the state. Such methods easily react.

When military camps are established. Briers and thorns flourish. When great armies have moved through the land calamities are sure to follow.

The capable are determined, but no more. They will not venture to compel; determined, but not conceited; determined, but not boastful; determined, but not arrogant; determined because it cannot be helped; determined, but not forceful.

When things reach their prime, they begin to age. This cannot be said to be the Tao. What is Not the Tao soon ends.

He who assists a ruler of men with Tao does not force the world with arms.

For the actions of arms will be well requited; where armies have been quartered brambles and thorns grow. Great wars are for certain followed by years of scarcity.

He aims only at carrying out relief, and does not venture to force his power upon others.

When relief is done, he will not be assuming, He will not be boastful; he will not be proud; And he will think that he was obliged to do it. So it comes that relief is done without resorting to force.

When things come to the summit of their vigour, they begin to grow old. This is against Tao. What is against Tao will soon come to an end.

Government without Coercion

Those who use a guide to help the ruling class

should not coerce the social world with arms.

Social affairs are highly reciprocal.

Where you place a division,

thorns and briars grow.

In the wake of a great army

inevitably lies years of calamities.

Skill bears fruit --period!

Do not presume, in view of that, to choose coercion.

Have effects and avoid regard.

Have effects and avoid assault.

Have effects and avoid pride.

Have effects and treat it as inevitable.

Have effects and avoid coercion.

Natural kinds are robust--then they get old.

This is called 'don't guide.'

Practice 'don't guide' early!

Aiding in governing the kingdom through Tao means not depending on the superiority of arms.

Depending on the superiority of arms creates consequences.

Wherever there are armies, disorder occurs.

After a great battle, there is a year of deprivation.

Victory is merely the outcome of a contest.

One should not dare to claim superiority of power.

As victory is merely an outcome, one should not boast about it.

As it is merely an outcome, one should not show off because of it.

As it is merely an outcome, one should not be proud of it.

As it is merely an outcome, one cannot help but have it.

As it is merely an outcome, one should not claim superiority of power.

Claiming to be strong leads to decay.

This violates Tao.

That which violates Tao will not last long.

The ruler who rules his people with Tao

need not show his force with an army.

If he who rules does so with the force of an army the others will return with the force of an army.

Wherever armies have marched,

thistles and thorns grow.

Whenever a great war has begun,

crop failure and famine follow.

That is why a good ruler would not dare to flaunt the power of his army.

He would not use the force to glory in the force.

He uses the army, yet with reserve and dignity.

He uses the army, yet with politeness.

He uses the army just because he is forced to do so.

That is what 'to show consideration and not force' means.

A strong army is like a creature in its prime:

it will only grow older.

This is the rule of Tao and that is the reason why one should not oppose the Tao.

He who opposes the Tao will meet an early end.

Use the Tao to assist your sovereign lord;

Do not use military power

To flaunt your strength over all under heaven.

Such things are apt to boomerang:

Where an army has encamped,

Brambles and thorns grow.

A good commander stops

Once his end is achieved,

And does not thereby seek military superiority.

His end achieved, he is not arrogant;

His end achieved, he is not conceited;

His end achieved, he does not brag;

His end achieved, he accepts it reluctantly.

This is called

Achieving the end without seeking military superiority.

Something ages while still in its prime

Is contrary to the Tao;

What is contrary to the Tao perishes early.

The person who helps a ruler of men with the Tao

Does not force the world with weapons.

He aims only to redeem the Tao,

And does not attempt to force his strength on others.

Bringing redemption, he does not attribute it to himself,

He does not boast much, he is not proud,

He thinks that it is his obligation to do so.

This is how redemption will be, without force.

When things reach their full power,

They begin their process of aging.

This goes against the Tao.

Whatever goes against the Tao will quickly come to an end.

One who assists the ruler of men by means of the way does not intimidate the
empire by a show of arms.

This
is something which is liable to rebound.

Where troops have encamped

There will brambles grow;

In the wake of a mighty army

Bad harvests follow without fail.

One
who is good aims only at bringing his campaign to a conclusion and dare not
thereby intimidate.

Bring it to a conclusion but do not brag;

Bring it to a conclusion but do not be arrogant;

Bring it to a conclusion but only when there is no choice;

Bring it to a conclusion but do not intimidate.

A
creature in its prime doing harm to the old

Is known as going against the way.

That which goes against the way will come to an early end.

Be Chary of War

He who with Reason assists the master of mankind will not with arms strengthen the empire. His methods invite requital.

Where armies are quartered briars and thorns grow. Great wars unfailingly are followed by famines. A good man acts resolutely and then stops. He ventures not to take by force.

Be resolute but not boastful; resolute but not haughty; resolute but not arrogant; resolute because you cannot avoid it; resolute but not violent.

Things thrive and then grow old. This is called un-Reason. Un-Reason soon ceases.

A father who trusts in the Tao doesn't force his children to do anything, and doesn't discipline them. He knows this would be against the natural way and would damage the children as well as himself. The master knows if force is used on a child, weeds will grow in the child's mind. Achievements may be apparent, but he will not boast or take pride in them. He knows they are attributed to the Tao, and no claimant exists. From here he simply moves on. This is the natural way.

One guided by Direction does not use military power to subdue the people in the world.

It boomerangs.

Where armies visit, thorns grow.

After a great war, famines follow.

One who knows war stops after the objective is reached.

He dares not flaunt power.

Reach objective, but boast not;

reach objective, but tout not;

reach objective, but show arrogance not;

Reaching objective is because there is no alternative;

Reaching objective does not call for flaunting power.

Matter withers after saturation.

This is not in line with Direction.

Not in line with Direction, early demise is the expectation.

If you use the Way to help a ruler of people

you never use weapons to coerce all beneath heaven.

Such things always turn against you:

fields where soldiers camp turn to thorn and bramble, and vast armies on the march leave years of misery behind.

The noble prevail if they must, then stop: they never press on to coerce the world.

Prevail, but never presume.

Prevail, but never boast.

Prevail, but never exult.

Prevail, but never when there's another way.

This is to prevail without coercing.

Things grown strong soon grow old.

This is called losing the Way: Lose the Way and you die young.

He who assists a ruler through Tao,

Disavows dominating the world by military force.

The effects of using force are immediate:

Wherever the army is stationed, briars and thorns will grow.

(After a big war, years of famine will surely follow.)

The best leader cares only about an accommodation, and

Dares not to gain dominance by force.

An accommodation reached without conceit, brag, or arrogance; but on account of no better alternative and

reluctance of using force.

Everything decays after its prime,

This (using force) would be counter to Tao.

Whoever acts counter to Tao leads to his early demise.

When
it happens that tao assists men and lords

The force of the soldier is not in the world.

What
takes effort is likely to return.

Briars
and thorns grow within the dwelling place of the army

Behind a great military comes the seed for a faminous year.

Those
who value

Achieve results yet stop

Are without venturing to strive to hold

Achieve results yet do not brag

Achieve results yet do not boast

Achieve results yet do not be arrogant

Achieve results yet without being done

Achieve results yet do not strive.

Things
reach the prime and then are old?

Appropriately called not in accordance with tao

What
is not in accordance with tao comes to an early end.

(of all the excesses, the most prejudicial, the most damnable, as that of weapons, war). Those who act as advisors to a prince should keep themselves from wanting to make war against a country. (For such action, calling for revenge, is always paid for dearly).

Wherever the troops stay the land produces only thorns, having been abandoned by the farm workers. Wherever a great army has passed, years of unhappiness (from famine and brigandage) follow.

Therefore the good general is content to do only what he has to do, (the least possible; moral, rather than material repression). He stops as soon as possible, guarding himself from exploiting his force to the limit.

He does as much as is required (to reestablish peace), not for his personal advantage and fame, but from necessity and with reluctance, without any intention of increasing his power.

Any height of power is always followed by decadence. Making oneself is therefore contrary to the Principle (the source of duration). He who is lacking on this point, will not be long in coming to an end.

The one who uses the Tao to advise the ruler

Does not dominate the world with soldiers

Such methods tend to be returned

The place where the troops camp

Thistles and thorns grow

Following the great army

There must be an inauspicious year

A good commander achieves result, then stops

And does not dare reaching for domination

Achieves result but does not brag

Achieves result but does not flaunt

Achieves result but is not arrogant

Achieves result but only out of necessity

Achieves result but does not dominate

Things become strong and then get old

This is called contrary to the Tao

That which is contrary to the Tao soon ends

A minister who follows the Tao, and applies the Tao in advising the sovereign ruler, will never attempt to dominate the world with military power. Those who are in tune with the Tao understand that violence begets more violence. What goes around comes around. Those who resort to methods of domination tend to have such methods turn back against them. Acts of aggression will inevitably cause retaliation and counterattack.

The use of military power is, by its very nature, an extremely negative thing to do. The thistles and thorns that flourish where the troops strike camp is symbolic of this negativity. When a great army passes the land, an ominous year of famine invariably follows in its wake.

Military leaders who really understand the use of force will never do any more than is necessary to achieve a particular result. Such leaders will not reach beyond the goal for more self-glorifying conquests. They accomplish the mission without bragging or flaunting. Success in completing the objective does not make them arrogant or over-confident. This is because they use force only when they have no other choice. They know that military power is the last resort, and not a tool with which to dominate others.

In nature, we observe that when things grow excessively strong, they will quickly age and weaken. We say that this is not in accordance with the unhurried nature of Tao. Things that do not follow the natural progression of Tao will soon come to an end. The same principle applies to the use of military power as well.

BE STINGY OF WAR

When the magistrate follows Tao, he has no need to resort to force of arms to strengthen the Empire, because his business methods alone will show good returns.

Briars and thorns grow rank where an army camps. Bad harvests are the sequence of a great war. The good ruler will be resolute and then stop, he dare not take by force. One should be resolute but not boastful; resolute but not haughty; resolute but not arrogant; resolute but yielding when it cannot be avoided; resolute but he must not resort to violence.

By a resort to force, things flourish for a time but then decay. This is not like the Tao and that which is not Tao-like will soon cease.

One who assists the ruler with Tao,

Does not overpower (ch'iang) the world by military conquests.

Such affairs have a way of returning (huan):

Where armies are stationed,

Briars and thorns grow,

After great campaigns,

Bad years are sure to follow.

The good person is resolute (kuo) only,

But dares not (kan) take the path of the strong (ch'iang).

Be resolute (kuo) yet do not boast (ching),

Be resolute yet do not show off (fa),

Be resolute yet do not be haughty,

Be resolute because you have no choice,

Be resolute yet do not overpower (ch'iang).

When things are full grown, they age.

This is called not following Tao.

Not following Tao they perish early.

Tao in War

Whoever advises a ruler according to Tao opposes conquest by war. Policies of war tend to rebound. Where the armies march, brambles grow. Whenever a great army is formed, hunger and evil follow. So, a wise general achieves his goal and stops; he does not battle beyond victory; he wins, but does not boast of it; he wins, but does not celebrate it; he wins, but does not revel in the spoils; he wins, for it is his duty to win; he wins, but not from love of violence. Things reach their peak, then decline. Violence opposes Tao. Whoever opposes Tao dies early.

How to govern in accordance with the Tao:

No conquest by force of arms.

Weapons always turn back against themselves.

Encamp an army today;

the campground is all thorns and brambles tomorrow.

Make war for a month; there will be famine for years.

Do what needs to be done, but do not rejoice in victory.

Make war, if necessary, and win,

but without arrogance, without hostility, without pride,

without needless violence.

War, victory, and the rest do not last.

They are contrary to Tao.

What is contrary to Tao perishes quickly.

Thirty

Whenever you advise a ruler in the way of Tao,

Counsel him not to use force to conquer the universe.

For this would only cause resistance.

Thorn bushes spring up wherever the army has passed.

Lean years follow in the wake of a great war.

Just do what needs to be done.

Never take advantage of power.

Achieve results,

But never glory in them.

Achieve results,

But never boast.

Achieve results,

But never be proud.

Achieve results,

Because this is the natural way.

Achieve results,

But not through violence.

Force
is followed by loss of strength.

This is not the way of Tao.

That which goes against the Tao comes to an early end.

He who assists the ruler by means of the Tao

Does not conquer other countries by the military force.

Military actions usually invite retaliatory aftermath:

Wherever armies station,

Thistles and thorns grow;

A great war is always followed

By a great famine.

He who is well versed in the art of war

Only uses the force to win the war,

And not to bully or conquer other countries.

Win the war but do not boast;

Win the war but do not brag;

Win the war but do not show arrogance;

Win the war but do know it is out of necessity;

Win the war but do not thereby bully and conquer other countries.

Whatever is in its prime is bound to decline;

For, being in prime is against the Tao;

Whatever goes against the Tao

Will come to an early end.

He who assists the ruler by Tao

Does not resort to arms to dominate all under Heaven by force.

This thing loves to rebound.

Where troops have encamped,

Brambles grow;

After the raising of great armies

A famine follows invariably.

A good man merely lets it bear fruit;

He does not seek to force it.

He lets it bear fruit; he is not vainglorious.

He lets it bear fruit; he is not boastful.

He lets it bear fruit; he is not arrogant.

He lets it bear fruit, out of necessity.

He lets it bear fruit and does not force it.

When a thing reaches its prime, it becomes old.

Forcing is called contrary to Tao.

What is contrary to Tao expires early.

An enlightened minister prefers applying the principles of Dao to assist his sovereign in governing.

He is extremely reluctant to use force to subjugate others.

Using force always has repercussions.

Wherever the army passes through, the land is laid to waste and brambles grow.

After a major battle, there will be a famine the following year.

A moral person will only accomplish his task.

He will not be heavy-handed.

Achieving success, he is not ostentatious.

Accomplishing his task, he does not gloat.

Scoring victory, he is not arrogantly intransigent.

He goes to war in order to achieve his objective, only when he has no other choice.

Even after winning, he does not brutalise the vanquished.

Whenever anything reaches its peak, it starts to decline.

Moreover, excessive use of force is not in accordance with Dao.

Anything that goes against Dao will suffer an early demise.

Moderate Use of Force

Chien Wu

He who uses Tao to assist the ruler of a people

Will not employ armed force to dominate the world.

For such a scheme is apt to boomerang.

Where armies are quartered,

Briers and brambles abound.

After a great war, famine inevitably happens.

Therefore,

A good-natured man attains his objective and stops;

He dares not grab by violence.

He wants to attain his objective,

But does not extol it,

Nor brag about it, nor take pride in it.

He attains his objective as if it could not be helped,

And does not use it to practice violence.

For things, after their prime, will begin to decay.

Decay indicates disregard of Tao.

Whatever disregards Tao soon vanishes.

He who relied on the Tao to aid a ruler of men

Would not sek to conquer with weapons.

The man of Tao holds back from such instruments of recoiling violence.

For where armies have camped there spring up thistles and thorns;

And in the wake of marching armies follow years of drought.

Having achieved his aim, the good commander stops;

He does not venture to follow up his advantages with greater force.

He achieves his aim, but does not plume himself.

He achieves his aim, but is not boastful.

He achieves his aim but is not proud of what he has done.

He achieves his aim by means which could not be avoided.

He achieves his aim wihtout violence.

For it is when creatures reach the climax of their strength that they start to grow old;

Thus violence runs counter to the Tao,

And what runs counter to the Tao is soon spent.

He who uses Tao to guide rulers

Does not force beneath-heaven with arms.

Such things recoil on their users.

Where armies are

Briars and brambles grow.

Bad harvests follow big wars.

Be firm and that is all:

Dare not rely on force

Be firm but not haughty,

Firm but not boastful,

Firm but not proud:

Firm when necessary,

Firm but non-violent.

Things that flourish

Fall into decay.

This is not-Tao,

And what is not-Tao soon ends.

One who assists a leader with the subtle truth of the universe advises him not to use the force of arms to try to conquer the world,

for such things will always rebound.

It is generally the nature of weapons to turn against their wielders.

Whenever armies touch the land,

they turn it into a wasteland.

Moreover, plague and death invariably follow in the wake of a great war.

Therefore, a leader should be allowed to effect only a right purpose and not rely on the force of arms once his goal has been achieved.

He effects his right purpose,

but does not take pride in it.

He effects his right purpose as a regrettable necessity.

He effects his right purpose,

but does not delight in violence,

for he knows that to be excessively strong is to hasten decay and that violence is against the integral nature of the universe.

Whoever goes against the nature of the universe will soon perish.

XXX.

Sparing
of Wars

He
who in harmony with the Tao would aid a ruler of men

Will
not with warlike armaments strengthen the realm again,

But
his manner of work, if requital came, would bring good payment then.

Wherever
a martial host is camped, there thorns and briars grow,

And
the track of mighty armies years of ruined harvests show;

The
good commander is resoktte to strike the decisive blow,

Then
stops, for he does not dare complete and take by mastery;

Vain and
boastful and arrogant the leader must not be,

But
resolute, not violent, and from necessity.

When
things have reached their highest pitch they became decrepit and old,

But
this is not in accord with the Tao which Heaven and Earth enfold,

And
what is not in accord, will pass away like a tale that is told.

He who would help a Ruler of men by Tao

Does not take soldiers to give strength to the kingdom.

His service is well rewarded.

Where troops dwell, there grow thorns and briers.

After great wars, there follow bad years.

He who loves, bears fruit unceasingly,

He does not dare to conquer by strength.

He bears fruit, but not with assertiveness,

He bears fruit, but not with boastfulness,

He bears fruit, but not with meanness,

He bears fruit, but not to obtain it for himself,

He bears fruit, but not to shew his strength.

Man is great and strong, then he is old,

In this he is not of Tao.

If he is not of Tao

He will quickly perish.

Who
knows how to guide a leader in the path of Tao (the Laws of the Universe),

Does
not try to conquer the world

with
military force.

It
is in the nature of a military force to turn against its user.

(Economic
Force stregthens the Society)

Wherever
armies are stationed,

thorny
bushes grow.

After
a great war,

bad
years always follow.

(Over
spending for military might only overtaxes the people)

Protect
efficiently your own state,

But
not to aim at selfishness.

After
you have attained your purpose,

You
must not show off your success,

You
must not brag of your ability,

You
must not feel proud,

You
must rather regret that you had not been able to prevent the war.

You
must never think of taking control of others by force.

To
be over-developed is to quicken decay,

And
this is against Tao (the Laws of the Universe),

And
what is against Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

will
soon end.

He who, in harmony with the Way, would assist a lord of men, will not coerce All-under-heaven by force of arms. Such things are apt to recoil.

Wherever great armies are stationed, briars and thorns grow.

In the wake of great campaigns bad years are sure to follow.

A skilful (general) is resolute, that is all. He dares not use violence in seizing (the empire). Let him be resolute but not boastful; let him be resolute but not vainglorious; let him be resolute but not haughty. Let him be resolute because he has no choice. Let him be resolute but no use violence.

He who would assist a lord of men in harmony with the Tao will

not assert his mastery in the kingdom by force of arms. Such a course

is sure to meet with its proper return.

Wherever
a host is stationed, briars and thorns spring up. In the

sequence of great armies there are sure to be bad years.

A
skilful (commander) strikes a decisive blow, and stops. He does

not dare (by continuing his operations) to assert and complete his

mastery. He will strike the blow, but will be on his guard against

being vain or boastful or arrogant in consequence of it. He strikes

it as a matter of necessity; he strikes it, but not from a wish for

mastery.

When
things have attained their strong maturity they become old.

This may be said to be not in accordance with the Tao: and what is not

in accordance with it soon comes to an end.

One who guides a human ruler with THOU does not use force upon the universe.

Such a course is likely to rebound upon it's source.
Where
armies have been stationed, briars and brambles tend to grow.
A
good General attains the defense, and THAT IS ALL.
They
attain the defense, but not 'proudly.'
They attain the defense, but do not
boast.
They attain the defense only because THAT IS WHAT MUST BE DONE.
If
something grows old while still in it's prime,
that is called 'Not being
in accord with THOU.'
Not being in accord with THOU leads to untimely ends.

There
is an ancient way to lead

That just allows and does not force

For what goes out will come around

And violence will lead to wars

The
one who sees completes a task

And stops when it is done

Seeing all is on its own

And not controlled by anyone

The
seer sees that all is well

And does not need to please

Just gives acceptance everywhere

Puts everyone at ease

HE who knows how to guide a ruler in the path of Tao

Does not try to override the world with force of arms.

It is in the nature of a military weapon to turn against its wielder.

Wherever armies are stationed; thorny bushes grow.

After a great war, bad years invariably follow.

What you want is to protect efficiently your own state,

But not to aim at self-aggrandisement.

After you have attained your purpose,

You must not parade your success,

You must not boast of your ability,

You must not feel proud,

You must rather regret that you had not been able to prevent the war.

You must never think of conquering others by force.

For to be over-developed is to hasten decay,

And this is against Tao,

And what is against Tao will soon cease to be.

If you guide your nation by use of the Tao,

You will not rule it by use of military arms.

For even well-intentioned aggression

Has a way of returning to oneself.

Thorns and brambles grow thickly where an army has camped.

And years of destitution are likely after a great war.

When necessary; the skillful leader will strike a decisive blow and achieve a lasting victory.

He will guard against vain, boastful or arrogant thoughts in the aftermath of the destruction.

He will accomplish only the killing and destruction that is necessary,

and not the least bit more.

Things flourish, and then they decline,

This is the way of the Tao.

Those who lead people by following the Tao

don't use weapons to enforce their will.

Using force always leads to unseen troubles.

In
the places where armies march,

thorns and briars bloom and grow.

After armies take to war,

bad years must always follow.

The skillful commander

strikes a decisive blow then stops.

When victory is won over the enemy through war

it is not a thing of great pride.

When the battle is over,

arrogance is the new enemy.

War can result when no other alternative is given,

so the one who overcomes an enemy should not dominate them.

The strong always weakened with time.

This
is not the way of the Tao.

That which is not of the Tao will soon end.

The leader who understands how process unfolds uses as little force as possible and runs the group without pressuring people.

When force is used, conflict and argument follow. The group field degenerates. The climate is hostile, neither open nor nourishing.

The wise leader runs the group without fighting to have things a certain way. The leader's touch is light. The leader neither defends nor attacks.

Remember that consciousness, not selfishness, is both the means of teaching and the teaching itself.

Group members will challenge the ego of one who leads egocentrically. But one who leads selflessly and harmoniously will grow and endure.

A leader who is advised to rely on the Tao

Does not enforce his will upon the world by military means.

For such things are likely to rebound.

Wherever armies have camped

Thistles and briars grow.

In the wake of war

Bad years are sure to follow.

A good leader accomplishes only what he has set out to do

And is careful not to overestimate his ability.

He achieves his goal, but does not brag.

He effects his purpose, but does not show off.

He is resolute, but not arrogant.

He does what he must, though he may have little choice.

He gets results, but not by force.

Things that grow strong, soon grow weak.

This is not the Way of the Tao.

Not following the Tao leads to an early end.

Whenever
you have an opportunity to advise a

leader

regarding Infinity, advise her not to use

force

to try to gain control of the world.

Why?

Because
force attracts resistance

and the greater the force

the greater the resistance.

Briars
grow where armies have been

and hard times are the legacy of a great war.

Conclude
hostilities as soon as possible

and do not continue to use excessive force

after victory.

Fulfill
your purpose but never glory in inhumane

acts.

Fulfill your purpose but never boast of

bloodletting.

Fulfill your purpose but never take pride in

killing.

Fulfill your purpose but avoid violence.

Fulfill your purpose by flowing within

the oneness of Infinity.

The
use of force dissipates life.

Force is not the way of peace and harmony.

That which goes against peace and harmony

is short lived.

One who assists his Master with the Way,

will not foster war upon the World.

Such matters easily recoil.

Where Armies go, thorny brambles grow.

Bad years follow great armies.

The Good succeed and stop, not daring to hold by force.

Succeed, but do not gloat.

Succeed, but do not boast.

Succeed, but do not humiliate.

If you succeed and cannot stop, seek Victory without force.

Strength will wane.

This is not the Way; and what is not the Way will soon end.

He who advises the ruler in the Way of Tao

Advises against the use of military force to conquer the world.

Adopting force will invite resistance.

Where armies camp, brambles and thorns grow.

Years of bad harvests come after a great war.

A good ruler does what is needed, then stops,

Never daring to conquer the world.

So do what is needed without bragging.

Do what is needed without boasting.

Do what is needed without being arrogant.

Do what is needed, but only when there is no other way.

Do what is needed without using violence.

Use of violence is followed by defeat.

Such action is contrary to Tao,

And what is contrary to Tao soon comes to an early end.

Those who aid a government with the Way

Will not threaten the world with military power,

And are therefore returned with kindness in all affairs.

Where armies have stayed will grow only thorns and bush.

When military force dominates, an inauspicious year follows.

Wise leaders prefer natural results than uses of force.

And win victories that would result naturally.

They win without boasting about their valor,

Or feeling proud of their victories,

Or looking triumphant everywhere.

They win but feel guilty as if they were forced to it.

They win without military reinforcement.

Things that have become strong will begin to weaken.

That which weakens is against the Way.

What is against the Way cannot last long.

One who assists the people's rulers with Tao does not use weapons to force changes in the world. "Such action usually backfires."

Where troops camp, thorns and brambles grow.

Excellence consists in: Being resolute, that is all not venturing to take control by force

being resolute, but not boastful being resolute, but not overbearing being resolute, but not arrogant being resolute, when you have no choice being resolute, but not forcing.

Things are vigorous, then grow old and weak: A case of 'not-Tao.' Not-Tao, soon gone.

Ruler faithful to Tao will not send the army to a foreign country. This would incur calamity onto him, first of all.*

The land where an army passed becomes desolated. After war, lean years come.

A wise commander is never bellicose. A wise warrior never gets angry. He who can defeat the enemy does not attack. He who achieved victory stops and does not do violence to the defeated enemies. The victorious does not praise himself. He wins, but does not feel proud. He does not like wage wars. He wins because he is forced to fight. Though he wins, he is not bellicose.

If man in the prime of life begins to weaken and gets ill — this happens only because he has lived not in the harmony with Tao. The life of such a person ends before a due time.

* At least, according to the law of karma.

A Leader following the Tao Way

Doesn't use force to conquer.

Because he knows of the riposte,

That brings destruction, hunger and disease.

The
Enlightened Person doesn't use force for glory.

He does his actions without interfering.

He uses fight only in defense.

Thus he doesn't disturb harmony.

He who uses force is not on the Tao Way,

Thus he will be destroyed.

Those
who use the Dao to aid the masters of men do not employ weapons to take the
world by force. That tactic is good at recoiling upon its origin: Where armies
have trodden thorns and brambles spring up. After the great armies there must
follow bad years. In the case of the good use of armies, they are employed only
until results are obtained and nobody dares use them to grab power. When results
are obtained they dare not brag. When results are obtained they dare not boast.
When results are obtained they dare not be arrogant. When results are obtained
it is solely because there was no other way out. When results are obtained they
do not try to dominate. When creatures come to their prime they begin to age.
That is spoken of as the Dao (course) of retrograde action. What is on the retrograde
Dao is soon finished.

Those who aid the ruler with Tao do not use military force to conquer the world.

Because this will invite retaliation.

Where the army stays, briers and thorns grow.

After a great war comes the year of adversity.

The good man stops after getting results.

Without daring to conquer.

He achieves results without bragging,

Achieves results without exalting,

Achieves results without arrogance,

Achieves results with reluctance,

Achieves results without conquering.

A thing in its prime soon becomes old;

This is not Tao.

Not being Tao, it is sure to die early.

Leading the Leader

Those who use the Tao to guide leaders

Do not use forceful strategies in the world.

Such matters tend to recoil.

Where armies are positioned,

Thorny brambles are produced.

A great military always brings years of hunger.

Those who are skillful

Succeed and then stop.

They dare not hold on with force.

They succeed and do not boast.

They succeed and do not make claims.

They succeed and are not proud.

They succeed and do not acquire in excess.

They succeed and do not force.

Things overgrown will always decline.

This is not the Tao.

What is not the Tao will soon end.

Wake up. Do your work. Rest. Believe in yourself and leave it at that. The planets are in their orbits. The falcon will feed on the rodent. Accept this and the Dao will accept you.

To those who would help

The ruler of men

By means of the Way:

Let
him not with his militant might

Try to conquer the world;

This tactic is like to recoil.

For where armies have marched,

There do briars spring up;

Where great hosts are impressed,

Years of hunger and evil ensue.

The
good man's purpose once attained,

He stops at that;

He will not press for victory.

His point once made, he does not boast,

Or celebrate the goal he gained,

Or proudly indicate the spoils.

He won the day because he must:

But not by force or violence.

That
things with age decline in strength,

You well may say, suits not the Way;

And not to suit the Way is early death.

He who assists the rulers with Tao does not dominate under Heaven by force.

The use of force will soon incur requital.

Wherever armies are stationed, briers and thorns grow wild.

Great wars are always followed by famines.

Content yourself with your success and stop.

Do not seek to dominate under Heaven by force of arms.

Succeed but don't boast about it,

Succeed but don't brag about it,

Succeed but don't be arrogant,

Succeed and take it as you have to,

Succeed and don't attempt to dominate.

Things must grow old after reaching their prime, which is contrary to Tao.

Whatever is contrary to Tao will soon perish.

One who would assist the ruler of men in accordance with the Dao does not use military force to gain power over all under Heaven.

As for such matters, he is wont to let them revert.

Where armies deploy, there thistles and thorns grow.

The aftermath of great military operations is surely a year of famine.

One good at this desists when result is had and dares not use the opportunity to seize military supremacy.

Have result but do not take credit for it;

have result but do not boast about it;

have result but do not take pride in it;

have result but only when there is no choice;

have result but do not try to gain military supremacy.

Once a thing reaches its prime, it grows old.

We say it goes against the Dao, and what is against the Dao comes to an early end.

1. Those who assist their rulers with the Way,

2. Don't use weapons to commit violence in the world.

3. Such deeds easily rebound.

4. In places where armies are stationed, thorns and brambles will grow.

5. The good [general] achieves his result and that's all;

6. He does not use the occasion to seize strength from it.

7.
He achieves his result but does not become arrogant;

8. He achieves his result but does not praise his deeds;

9. He achieves his result and yet does not brag.

10. He achieves his result, yet he abides with the result because he has no
choice.

11. This is called achieving one's result [without] using force.

12.
When things reach their primes, they get old;

13. We called this "not the Way."

14. What is not the Way will come to an early end.

Listen up:

If you want to be a leader who's in touch with Tao,

never use violence to achieve your goals.

Every act of violence backfires.

An army on the move leaves a trail of tears,

and a military victory always lies in ruins.

The Masters
do what needs doing

and that's all they do.

Do what you have to do without arrogance or pride.

Get the job done and don't brag about it afterwards.

Do what you have to do, not for your own benefit,

but because it needs to be done.

And don't do it the way you think it should be done,

do it the way it needs to be.

The mighty will
always lose their power

and any connection they ever had to Tao.

They will not last long;

if you're not right with Tao,

you might as well be dead.

Force of Arms

Whoever advises a leader according to the Way

opposes conquest by force of arms.

The use of force tends to rebound.

Where armies march, thorns and brambles grow.

Whenever a great army is formed, scarcity and famine follow.

The skillful achieve their purposes and stop.

They dare not rely on force.

They achieve their purposes, but do not glory in them.

They achieve their purposes, but do not celebrate them.

They achieve their purposes, but do not take pride in them.

They achieve their purposes, but without violence.

Things reach their prime and then decline.

Violence is contrary to the Way.

Whatever is contrary to the Way will soon perish.

One who lets himself be guided by Tao rules without force conquers through non-resistance.

Where war rages only thistles and thorns grow great armies are followed by ravage and want.

The Sage conquers without a word.

Without effort without harshness without arming without bragging he rules rightly as an agent of Right.

One who is arrogant and hard soon breaks up because he is Tao-less.

One who is willing and gentle and has Tao has permanence.

Warning Against The Use of Force

Lao Tze says,

If the king assists himself with the Tao, he will not assert his mastery in the world by force of arms.

He always seeks a consummate result.

Whenever a host has encamped, there will be briars and thorns grown.

In the sequences of great armies there are sure to be bad years.

The skillful ruler knows to attain a good result, he doesn't dare continue his operations to complete his mastery.

In anticipating a good result, being self-opinioned is not appropriate.

In anticipating a good result, take action only when there is no alternative course.

In anticipating a good result, being masterful is not appropriate.

When things have attained strong maturity, they become old.

This may be said to be not in accordance with the Tao.

And what is not in accordance with the Tao soon comes to an end.

A CAVEAT AGAINST VIOLENCE

When
leading by the way of the Tao,

abominate the use of force,

for it causes resistance, and loss of strength,

showing the Tao has not been followed well.

Achieve results but not through violence,

for it is against the natural way,

and damages both others' and one's own true self.

The
harvest is destroyed in the wake of a great war,

and weeds grow in the fields in the wake of the army.

The
wise leader achieves results,

but does not glory in them;

is not proud of his victories,

and does not boast of them.

He knows that boasting is not the natural way,

and that he who goes against that way,

will fail in his endeavours.

Whoever relies on the Tao in governing men

doesn't try to force issues

or defeat enemies by force of arms.

For every force there is a counterforce.

Violence, even well intentioned,

always rebounds upon oneself.

The Master does his job

and then stops.

He understands that the universe

is forever out of control,

and that trying to dominate events

goes against the current of the Tao.

Because he believes in himself,

he doesn't try to convince others.

Because he is content with himself,

he doesn't need others' approval.

Because he accepts himself,

the whole world accepts him.

A ruler who is in accord with Dao will never use military force to override the world,

Because this kind of affair ensures reciprocal killing.

Once an army has operated in the field there is nothing left growing but thorny bushes.

Once a great war is over, invariably there are horrible years following.

The perfect fighter is decisive, yet he does not allow himself to be violent.

Decisive but not proud;

decisive but not boastful and decisive when he is obliged to fight.

Be decisive but not aggressive.

A matured living body will soon grow old.

That is called "aberration of Dao".

Aberration of Dao will cause early death.

Using the Tao as the rule for governing the people,

Do not employ the army as the power of the world.

For this is likely to backfire.

Where the army has marched, thorns and briars grow.

Being good has its own consequence,

Which cannot be seized by power.

Achieving without arrogance,

Achieving without bragging,

Achieving without damage,

Achieving without taking ownership.

This is called achieving without force.

Matter becomes strong, then old.

This is called "Not-Tao."

Dying young is "Not-Tao."

XXX

Whoever
the tao aids in leading the people

Does not rely on weapons and violence

Armies consume, and destroy, and nothing more

A true leader uses them only at need

Lives with the destruction they create only as long it is needed

And so achieves his ends without using force

When
armies are used for gaining profit, or pride, or glory,

Or to show the martial prowess of leader and nation

They serve only to fill heads and empty bellies

This is imbalanced, and must be held like that at great cost

This is not the way, sooner or later will collapse of itself

Assisting Human Leaders with the Way

Those who assist human leaders with the Way

do not coerce the world with weapons,

for these things are apt to backfire.

Brambles grow where an army has been;

there are always bad years after a war.

Therefore the good are effective, that is all;

they do not presume to grab power thereby:

they are effective but not conceited,

effective but not proud,

effective but not arrogant.

They are effective when they have to be,

effective but not coercive.

If you peak in strength, you then age;

this, it is said, is unguided.

The unguided soon come to an end.

Those who aid the ruler with Tao do not use military power to win the world.

This is because such action is likely to backfire:

Where armies camp, thorny problems arise,

Where troops march, fatal years follow.

The competent general stops when the goal is reached, and never flaunts.

Never be vainglorious when the goal is achieved.

Never be haughty when the goal is achieved.

Never be arrogant when the goal is achieved.

Never do more than necessary when the goal is achieved.

Never flaunt when the goal is achieved.

It is not following Tao if things wilt while still in their prime.

Not following Tao results in an untimely end.

He who knows how to guide a ruler in the path of the Way does not try to override the world with force of arms.

It is in the nature of arms to turn against its wielder.

Wherever armies are stationed, thorny bushes grow.

After a great war, bad harvests follow.

After victory, to protect efficiently one's own state, one should not to rely on force.

Victory without claiming ability.

Victory without claiming success.

Victory without being proud.

Victory but saying it is not one's will.

Victory with no longer relying on force.

A thing at its strength begins to become old; this is against the Way; what is against the Way will soon cease to be.

Advise a ruler with Tao,

Not use military to conquer the world.

For it would only cause resistance.

The terrain army passes is always filled with thorned bushes.

After war, famine will come.

For those who know the right way to conquer,

never use force.

After the conquer,

never glory in them,

never boast,

never be proud.

Even the conquer is necessary,

never force it.

Potency (strength) is always followed by aging (weakness).

Doing so, is not the way of Tao.

Non-Tao, dies young.

If you would assist leaders of people

by way of the Tao,

you will oppose the use of armed force to overpower

the world.

Those
who use weapons will be harmed by them.

Where troops have camped only thorn bushes grow.

Bad harvests follow in the wake of a great army.

The
skillful person strikes the blow and stops,

without taking advantage of victory.

Bring it to a conclusion but do not be vain.

Bring it to a conclusion but do not be boastful.

Bring it to a conclusion but do not be arrogant.

Bring it to a conclusion but only when there is no choice.

Bring it to a conclusion but without violence.

When
force is rlsed, youthful strength decays.

This is not the way of Tao.

And that which goes against the Tao

will quickly pass away.

If
you talk with others about the ways of the dao or atheism

advise them not to use force in action or word

because force returns upon its user

and creates resistance.

Where force is used

to convince or control,

nothing will grow.

Great campaigns against an enemy belief

bring years of animosity and withdrawal.

Do what you must, then withdraw.

Succeed, but do not revel in the results.

Keep your commitments, but do not boast about it.

Accomplish your objective, and be satisfied.

Do what you must, but only because it is the next step

that must be taken to keep from falling.

Without violence, without pride,

nature's way.

Remember
that entropy begins

at the moment of accomplishment.

What is not natural will soon perish.

He who by dao purposes to help a ruler of men, will oppose most conquest by
force of arms:

such things are wont to rebound.

Where armies are, thorns and brambles can grow.

The raising of a great host could be followed by a year of dearth.

Therefore a good general effects his purpose and next stops; for he dares not
rely upon the strength of arms: he doesn't take further advantage of a victory.
He fulfils his purpose and does hardly glory in things he has done; effects
his purpose and doesnt boast of a thing he accomplished;

fulfils an ignoble purpose, but takes no pride in something he did well; fulfils
his purpose as some perhaps regrettable necessity - does it as a step that could
hardly be averted and avoided. So he effects his purpose, but hardly loves violence.
Why?

Things
age after reaching their prime. What has a time of vigour (and conquest) also
has its time of decay. After things reach their prime, they begin to grow old,
which means being contrary to dao. Furthermore, morbid violence and violence
in excess could be against dao. He who is against the dao perishes young. Whatever
is contrary to dao will soon perish. Whats against dao will hardly survive.

One who assists the ruler of men with the Way

does not use force of arms against all under heaven;

Such a course is likely to boomerang.

Where armies have been stationed, briars and brambles will grow.

A good general fulfills his purpose

and that is all.

He does not use force to seize for himself.

He fulfills his purpose, but is not proud;

He fulfills his purpose, but is not boastful;

He fulfills his purpose, but does not brag;

He fulfills his purpose only because he has no other choice.

This is called "fulfilling one's purpose without using force."

If something grows old while still in its prime,

This is called "not being in accord with the Way."

Not being in accord with the Way leads to an early demise.

The man who aids the King by use of Tao forces the people into submission without resort to the use of arms. He will not regard the fruit of his actions.

Prickly briars and thorns flourish where battalions have quartered.

Bad years follow on the heels of armies in motion.

The good soldier is brave when occasion requires, but he does not risk himself for power.

Brave is he when occasion requires, but he does not oppress.

Brave is he when occasion requires, but he does not boast.

Brave is he when occasion requires, but he is not mean.

Brave is he when occasion requires, but he does not rage.

Things become old through excess of vigour. This is called Non-Tao; and what is Non-Tao is soon wasted!

Win or Lose?

Your relationship will always

have issues to face.

If you try to win your own way

you will lose.

If you attempt to dominate

by the force of your clever arguments,

the brilliance of your personality,

or the righteousness of your cause,

you will reap a whirlwind of trouble.

If you win,

your beloved loses.

If your beloved wins,

you lose.

Is this the path of love?

No solution ever emerges from love

that creates a winner and a loser.

Ever!

Love always finds a way,

with patience, effort, and compassion,

to meet the needs of both.

Have patience.

Keep looking.

He who assists the ruler with Tao does not dominate the world with force. The use of force usually bring requital.

Wherever armies are stationed, briers and thorns grow. Great wars are always followed by famines.

A good (general) achieves his purpose and stops, But dares not seek to dominate the world.

He achieves his purpose but does not brag about it. He achieves his
purpose but does not boast about it. He achieves his purpose but is not
proud of it. He achieves his purpose but only as an unavoidable step. He
achieves his purpose but does not aim to dominate.

(For) after things reach their prime, they begin to grow old, Which
means being contrary to Tao. Whatever is contrary to Tao will soon
perish.

One who would
guide a leader of men in the uses of life

Will warn him against the use of arms for conquest.

Weapons often turn upon the wielder,

An army's harvest is a waste of thorns,

Conscription of a multitude of men

Drains the next year dry.

A good general, daring to march, dares also to halt,

Will never press his triumph beyond need.

What he must do he does but not for glory,

What he must do he does but not for show,

What he must do he does but not for self;

He has done it because it had to be done,

Not from a hot head.

Let life ripen and then fall,

Force is not the way at all:

Deny the way of life and you are dead.

Those who use the DAO to assist their monarchs do not rely on force to conquer the world.

If you use force, it so easily comes back and haunts you.

Thorns will grow where the army camped,

A year of starvation will follow a big war.

A person who understands war will only fight to win a war,

Not to use force to conquer the world.

After winning a war, do not be self-satisfied.

After winning a war, do not show off.

After winning a war, do not be conceited.

After winning a war, treat it like you were forced to fight.

After winning a war, do not use force to conquer the world.

When things become too strong, they start to decay,

Which is against the DAO.

Being against the DAO will lead to an early destruction.

Those who assist national leaders by means of the Tao,

Never use military force to make their nations world powers.

No action is ever without a repercussion:

Wherever an army is stationed, there grow briars and brambles.

Wherever a battle is fought, there follows a famine.

A good general in the direst necessity of a war

Achieves his purpose of winning the war,

But never seeks to gain power over others.

Therefore,

achieve your purpose, but only if it is called for;

Achieve your purpose, but never be haughty;

Achieve your purpose, but never be boastful;

Achieve your purpose, but never be supercilious;

Achieve your purpose, but never be overpowering.

Whenever something reaches an extreme in strength, it will inevitably decline.

This is called the way against the Tao.

The way against the Tao always leads to an early demise.

Those who aid a government with the Way

Will not threaten the world with military power,

And are therefore returned with kindness in all affairs.

Where armies have stayed will grow only thorns and bush.

When military force dominates, an inauspicious year follows.

Wise leaders prefer natural results than uses of force.

And win victories that would result naturally.

They win without boasting about their valor,

Or feeling proud of their victories,

Or looking triumphant everywhere.

They win but feel guilty as if they were forced to it.

They win without military reinforcement.

Things that have become strong will begin to weaken.

That which weakens is against the Way.

What is against the Way cannot last long.

If you guide your nation by use of the Tao,

You will not rule it by use of military arms.

For even well-intentioned aggression

Has a way of returning to oneself.

Thorns and brambles grow thickly where an army has camped.

And years of destitution are likely after a great war.

When necessary; the skillful leader will strike a decisive blow and achieve a lasting victory.

He will guard against vain, boastful or arrogant thoughts in the aftermath of the destruction.

He will accomplish only the killing and destruction that is necessary,

and not the least bit more.

Things flourish, and then they decline,

This is the way of the Tao.

