===== Chapter 23 =====

Sparse speech is by nature.

Therefore, whirling winds do not last the morning.

Sudden rain does not last the day.

Who are they who do this? Heaven and Earth.

Even Heaven and Earth are not able to [make it] last—

And [what are] people

Compared to [them]?

Therefore, those who manage affairs with the Tao

Are together with the Tao.

Those who are virtuous are together with Virtue.

Those who err are together with error.

Those who are with the Tao—the Tao is likewise glad to gain them.

Those who are with Virtue—Virtue is likewise glad to gain them.

Those who are with error—

Error—alas!—is glad to gain them.

Where belief is insufficient

There exists disbelief.

Spare words; nature's way. Violent winds do not blow all morning. Sudden rain cannot pour all day.

What causes these things? Heaven and Earth. If Heaven and Earth do not blow and pour for long, How much less should humans?

Therefore in following Tao: Those on the way become the way, Those who gain become the gain, Those who lose become the loss.

All within the Tao: The wayfarer, welcome upon the way, Those who gain,
welcome within gain, Those who lose, welcome withon loss.

Without trust in this, There is no trust at all.

Nature is sparing of words:

High winds do not last all morning.

A cloudburst does not last all day.

What makes them happen?

Heaven and earth.

If heaven and earth cannot sustain their works

How can people sustain theirs?

Therefore if you follow Tao you become like Tao.

If you follow virtue you become like virtue.

If you forsake Tao you become forsaken.

Those who are like Tao

Are gladly welcomed by Tao.

Those who are like virtue

Are gladly welcomed by virtue.

Those who are forsaken

Are gladly welcomed by forsakenness.

Those who don't trust receive no trust.

ADMONITIONS

Nature is inaudible, yet it speaks distinctly -

A fierce storm lasts less than a morning,

Rain normally less than a day.

These, being of nature and short in duration,

Thus should the duration of violence in man

be no greater than these.

Hence: One who follows Tao, becomes one with Tao.

One who follows Te, becomes one with Te.

One who separates from Tao and Te,

becomes one with separation.

And:

When one adheres to Tao, Tao adheres to him

When one adheres to Te, Te adheres to him.

When one adheres to separation, Separation adheres to him.

Separating from faith in one's own nature,

Is to lose understanding of the true nature

of heaven and earth.

Scatter your words spontaneously.

Gusty winds do not outlast the dawn.

Torrential rains do not outlast the sun.

Why does Heaven Earth (nature) do this?

Heaven Earth (nature) honors the power of change.

Is it less so for people?

You need to pursue your activities through the Tao.

The Tao becomes one with the Tao.

The action of the soul becomes one with the action of the soul.

Change becomes one with change.

Become one with the Tao and enjoy the benefits of the Tao.

Become one with the action of the soul and enjoy the benefits of the action of the soul.

Become one with change and enjoy all the benefits of change.

Faith is never enough! Be in the place of change, not in the place of faith.

THE VOID OF NAUGHT

To keep silence is the mark of one who is acting in full accordance with

his Will. A fierce wind soon falleth; a storm-shower doth not last all

day. Yet Heaven and Earth cause these; and if they fail to make violence

continue, how much less can man abide in spasm of passion!

With
him that devoteth him to Tao, the devotees of Tao are in accord; so

also are the devotees of Teh, yea, even they who fail in seeking those are in

accord.

So
then his brothers in the Tao are joyful, attaining it; and his

brothers in the Teh are joyful, attaining it; and they who fail in

seeking these are joyful, partaking of it. But if he himself realize not

the Tao with calm of confidence, then they also appear lacking in

confidence.

To speak sparingly is the natural course. A whirlwind lasts not throughoutthe morning. A spray rain lasts not the day. Such it is between heavenand earth. And such it is with man. Who dedicates himself to reason willbecome one with reason. Who dedicates himself to virtue, will become onewith virtue. Who gives to evil will become one with evil. Who is one withreason, will be embraced by reason. Who is one with virtue, will be embracedby virtue. Who joins evil will be one with evil. Who has no faith, willnever inspire faith.

One who knows oneself doesn't need a lot of words

A whirlwind doesn't last all morning

A shower doesn't last a whole day

Where do wind and rain come from?

They sprout from nature

If nature doesn't endure its rains and storms

Then why should a human being have to talk so much?

So the One who follows his conscience, coincides with his conscience

One who lives an exemplary life, will be an example

One who loses oneself, doesn't know who he is anymore

One who finds oneself, finds bliss

One who loses oneself, loses true life

One who does not trust oneself, will not be trusted

Things which act naturally do not need to be told how to act. The wind and rain begin without being ordered, and quit without being commanded. This is the way with all natural beginnings and endings.

If Nature does not have to instruct the wind and the rain, how much less should man try to direct them?

Whoever acts naturally is Nature itself acting. And whoever acts unintelligently is unintelligence in action.

By acting naturally, one reaps Nature's rewards. So by acting intelligently, one achieves intelligent goals. Whereas by acting unintelligently, one comes to an unintelligent end.

Those who do not trust Nature as a model cannot be trusted as guides.

To be always talks is against nature.

For the same reason a hurricane never lasts a whole morning,

Nor a rainstorm all day.

Who is it that makes the wind and rain?

It is Heaven-and Earth.

And if even Heaven-and Earth cannot blow or pour for long,

How much less in his utterance should man?

Truly, if one uses the Way as one's instrument,

The results will be like the Way;

If one uses the "power" as instrument,

The results will be like the "power".

If one uses what is the reverse of the "power",

The results will be the reverse of the "power".

For to those who have conformed themselves to the Way,

The Way readily lends its power.

To those who have conformed themselves to the power,

The power readily, lends more power.

While to those who conform themselves to inefficacy,

Inefficacy readily lends its ineffectiveness.

"It is by not believing in people that you turn them into liars."

To speak a short time is the way of nature.

High winds blow out before morning.

Hard rain subsides in a day.

What issues these?

The realm of heaven and earth.

If the realm of heaven and earth cannot maintain duration,

what chance has man?

This is why one embraces Tao.

He who aligns with Tao becomes one with Tao.

He who aligns with virtue attains supreme virtue.

He who fails to align with Tao is lost.

He who aligns with Tao is received by Tao.

He who aligns with virtue finds only virtue.

He who has become lost is close to home.

Faith comes to the faithful.

Sparing are the speeches from nature

So the whirling winds do not last morning

The storming rains do not last all day

What is it producing these?

Heaven and earth

(If) even heaven and earth are unable to persist

Then compare this (case) with humanity!

And so to attend to affairs of the path:

The path means an identity with the path

Character means an identity with character

Failure means an identity with failure

For those who identify with the path

The path, in turn, readily* accepts them

For those who identify with character

Character, in turn, readily accepts them

For those who identify with failure

Failure, in turn, readily accepts them

If truth has no basis here

There will be no truth here

Acceptance and Contention

To talk little, is the way of Nature.

Fierce winds do not last all morning.

Heavy rain does not last all day.

Who makes these things!

If even Heaven and Earth

Cannot make these things last long,

How much more is this true for man?

Therefore one who devotes himself to Tao

Is one with Tao.

One who devotes himself to Virtue [and attainment]

is one with Virtue.

One who devotes himself to losing

is one with that loss.

To the one who is one with Virtue,

Tao also gives Virtue.

While for the one who is one with his loss,

Tao also disregards him.

Nature is sparing with speech: a whirlwind doesn't last all morning; a rain shower doesn't last all day.

What causes these? Heaven and earth. If heaven and earth can't make something famous endure, how could man?

Concentrate on Tao and you'll experience Tao. Concentrate on power and you'll experience power. Concentrate on loss and you'll experience loss.

If you won't trust, you won't be trusted.

Be sparing in your speech,

And then return to silence.

Be truly a part of Nature:

Its storm-brought winds do not outlast the dawn;

Its rain drums and sings upon the thirsty earth,

And then the clouds recede before the sun.

What made this dance of sound and silence?

If the Cosmic Consciousness thus ebbs and flows,

Why not we, the word-drunk wanderers of this world?

Therefore, the student of the Sage

Steps mindfully through his life:

He allows the Cosmic Voice

To speak through his actions,

And so he need not talk himself.

Modesty is the golden thread of the Cosmic tapestry.

It is the active mode of Nature:

The breath of bliss in life.

Modesty acts through renunciation:

It abandons identification.

In exploding the image,

It liberates the self.

In dropping comparison,

It inaugurates autonomy and lets loose joy.

As you learn, ask yourself:

"Is my life founded on mere faith,

Or rooted in the natural experience

Of my inner being?"

Whoever follows Tao becomes as Tao.

Whoever follows Teh becomes as Teh.

Whoever abandons Tao or Teh

will be abandoned by Tao and Teh.

Whoever
seeks Tao is welcomed by Tao.

Whoever seeks Teh is welcomed by Teh.

Whoever seeks abandonment

is welcomed by abandonment.

Few words are natural.

A whirlwind does not outlast the morning; a deluge does not outlast the day. Who produces these? The Heaven-Earth. If the Heaven-Earth cannot produce lasting phenomena, how much less can man?

Wherefore settling everything in accordance with the Tao, embodying the Tao they become identified with the Tao. Embodying its virtue, they become identified with virtue. Embodying loss, they become identified with loss.

Identified with Tao, they joyfully accept the Tao; identified with virtue, they joyfully accept virtue; identified with loss, they joyfully accept loss.

If sincerity is lacking it is because of superficial faith.

To be sparing of words is natural. A violent wind cannot last a whole morning; pelting rain cannot last a whole day.

Who have made these things but heaven and earth? Inasmuch as heaven and earth cannot last forever, how can man?

He who engages himself in Tao is identified with Tao. He who engages himself in virtue is identified with virtue. He who engages himself in abandonment is identified with abandonment.

Identified with Tao he will be well received by Tao. Identified with virtue he will be well received by virtue. Identified with abandonment he will be well received by abandonment.

The Constancy of Guiding Concepts

Rare language is our own doing.

Hence a twisting wind does not end the morning.

A sudden storm does not end the day.

What makes these the case?--the cosmos.

The cosmos can raise it but cannot make it endure.

How much more is this the case with the human realm?

Hence those who pursue affairs with 'guidance'

Those of 'guidance,' join in guidance.

Those of 'virtuosity,' join in virtuosity.

Those of 'loss,' join in loss.

Those who join in guidance, guidance is pleased to get them.

Those who join in virtuosity, virtuosity is pleased to get them.

Those who join in loss, loss is pleased to get them.

When reliability is inadequate in it

There will be unreliability in it.

Nature rarely expresses itself in words.

When a hurricane occurs, it does not last all morning.

Neither does a heavy shower last the whole day.

These are actions of heaven and earth.

Thus, even heaven and earth cannot maintain their actions for long.

How can man?

Therefore, the learner of Tao identifies with Tao.

When one achieves it, one identifies with one's achievement.

When one loses it, one identifies with one's losing.

When man identifies with achievement, achievement also willingly identifies with man.

When man identifies with losing, losing willingly identifies with man.

If one does not believe enough in this identity, then it will not take place.

Nature speaks rarely.

A stormy wind cannot blow for the whole morning, a passing heavy shower cannot fall for the whole day.

Even Heaven and Earth cannot show their sudden power for ever - much less can men.

That is the reason why one who follows the Tao

accords the Tao with the Tao,

accords the virtue with the virtue,

accords the loss with the loss.

He who accords with the Tao is gladly accepted by the Tao.

He who accords with the virtue is gladly accepted by the virtue.

He who accords with the loss is gladly accepted by the loss.

When there isn't enough faith from he who leads the people, the people who follow him will not have good faith.

Speechlessness conforms to the way things are.

A turbulent wind does not last a whole morning;

A torrential rain does not last a whole day.

Who does these?

Heaven and earth.

Even heaven and earth cannot last long,

How can man?

Therefore, he who pursues the Tao

Identifies with the Tao;

He who pursues virtue identifies with virtue;

He who pursues loss identifies with loss.

He who identifies with virtue -

The Tao, too, shall requite him with favor;

He who identifies with loss -

The Tao, too, shall requite him with loss.

It is natural to be frugal with words.

A gale will not blow for an entire morning;

Pelting rain will not fall for a whole day.

Who causes all those?

Heaven and earth.

If (the fruit of) heaven and earth cannot last forever,

How can man?

The person who follows the Tao,

Is identified with the Tao.

The person who adheres to virtue,

Is identified with virtue.

The person who adheres to vice,

Is identified with vice.

When a person follows the Tao,

The Tao looks kindly upon him.

When the person adheres to virtue,

Virtue welcomes him.

When the person adheres to vice,

Vice opens its door to him.

To use words but rarely

Is to be natural.

Hence
a gusty wind cannot last all morning, and a sudden downpour cannot last all
day.

Who is it that produces these? Heaven and earth.

If even heaven and earth cannot go on forever, much less can man.

That is why one follows the way.

A
man of the way conforms to the way;

A man of virtue conforms to virtue;

A man of loss conforms to loss.

He who conforms to the way is gladly accepted by the way;

He who conforms to virtue is gladly accepted by virtue;

He who conforms to loss is gladly accepted by loss.

When
there is not enough faith, there is lack of good faith.

Emptiness and Non-Existence

To be taciturn is the natural way. A hurricane: does not outlast the morning. A cloudburst does not outlast the day.

Who causes these events but heaven and earth? If even heaven and earth cannot be unremitting, will not man be much less so?

Those who pursue their business in Reason, men of Reason, associate in Reason. Those who pursue their business in virtue associate in virtue. Those who pursue their business in ill luck associate in ill luck. When men associate in Reason, Reason makes them glad to find companions. When men associate in virtue, virtue makes them glad to find companions. When men associate in ill luck, ill luck makes them glad to find companions.

"If your faith is insufficient, verily shall ye receive no faith."

To be limited in speech is natural. Clouds may come, but when they pass the sun shines through. Your words may come, but when they pass there is silence. This is the natural way of the Tao. When things come, let them. When things pass, let them. Following the natural flow you will embody the Tao. Virtue can be experienced by the virtuous. Those who lose the natural way become lost. If you don't trust in your natural responses, you make yourself untrustworthy.

To be reticent is natural.

Thus, a whirlwind does not last all morning,

a downpour does not last all day.

Why is this so?

Because this is the universe.

Even the universe cannot sustain; can humans?

Thus, one who follows Direction manages with Direction,

One who follows virtue manages with virtue,

One who does not follow Direction nor virtue manages with neither

Direction nor virtue.

One who manages with Direction is welcome by those with Direction,

One who manages with virtue is welcome by those with virtue,

One who manages with neither Direction nor virtue is welcome by those without Direction or virtue.

One lacking in trustworthiness loses [the populace's] trust.

Keeping words spare: occurrence appearing of itself.

Wild winds never last all morning

and fierce rains never last all day.

Who conjures such things if not heaven and earth,

and if heaven and earth can't make things last,

why should we humans try?

That's why masters devote themselves to Way.

To master Way is to become Way,

to master gain is to become gain,

to master loss is to become loss.

And whatever becomes Way, Way welcomes joyfully,

whatever becomes gain, gain welcomes joyfully,

whatever becomes loss, loss welcomes joyfully.

If you don't stand sincere by your words how sincere can the people be?

Nature utters few words.

Thus:

Violent winds seldom last for a whole morning,

Pouring rains rarely persist for a full day.

Who is responsible? Heaven and Earth.

Even Heaven and Earth do not persist for long, how should human beings?

Therefore the practitioner of Tao knows that:

He who follows Tao identifies with the follower of Tao;

He who is virtuous identifies with the person of virtue;

He who lost faith identifies with the faithless.

He who is identified with Tao, the follower of Tao is also happy to be with him;

He who is virtuous, the person of virtue is also happy to be with him;

He who is faithless, the faithless person is also happy to be with him.

He who has not enough faith in others commands no faith from others.

Rare
words are natural.

So the fluttering winds do not last all morning

The sudden rainstorm does not last all day.

Who is it that acts this way?

Heavens and earth.

Heavens
and earth still lack the ability for longevity

Yet what relates to men is equal to this state of things?

So
follow effort in things related to tao

Be together with relating to tao

Follow effort in things related to the ideal

Be together with relating to the ideal

Follow effort in things related to losing

Be together with relating to losing.

What
is together with things related to tao

Tao also obtains joyfully

What is together with things related to the ideal

The ideal also obtains joyfully

What is together with things related to losing

Losing also obtains joyfully.

Belief
without enough within

A lack of belief in what is within happens.

To talk little, to act only without effort, that is the formula. A gusty wind does not blow all morning, torrential rain does not last all day.

And yet these effects are produced by heaven and earth, (the most powerful agents of all. But these are exaggerated, forced effects, that is why they cannot be sustained). If heaven and earth cannot sustain a forced action, how much less is man able to do so?

He who conforms himself to the Principle, conforms his principles to this Principle, his actions to the action of this Principle, his non-action to the non-action of this Principle.

Thus his principles, his actions, his non-action, (speculations, interventions, abstentions), always give him the contentment of success, (for, whether he succeeds or not, the Principle evolves, and therefore he is content).

(This doctrine of the abnegation of one's opinions and one's actions appeals to the taste of but few people). Many only believe in it a little, the others not at all.

Sparse speech is natural

Thus strong wind does not last all morning

Sudden rain does not last all day

What makes this so? Heaven and earth

Even heaven and earth cannot make it last

How can humans?

Thus those who follow the Tao, are with the Tao

Those who follow virtue, are with virtue

Those who follow loss, are with loss

Those who are with the Tao, the Tao is also pleased to have them

Those who are with virtue, virtue is also pleased to have them

Those who are with loss, loss is also please to have them

Those who do not trust sufficiently, others have no trust in them

To speak sparingly emulates nature, and is therefore natural.

For instance, an unusually strong windstorm will not persist the entire morning.

In the same way, an unusually sudden downpour will not continue the entire day.

What makes these things the way they are? Heaven and earth - nature.

If even heaven and earth cannot make events last indefinitely, then how can human beings? This is why we say that too much talk goes against nature.

Those who follow the Tao will identify with the Tao and become one with it. Similarly, those who practice virtues will identify with virtues and become one with them; those who pursue loss will identify with loss and become one with it.

The working of the universe is indifferent and will give you exactly what you seek. If you are one with the Tao, the Tao will happily accept you. If you identify with virtues, the virtues will be equally pleased to embrace you. If your path leads to the loss of the Tao and virtues, that loss will welcome you just as gladly.

Because of this karmic cause and effect, we can see that those who distrust others and have no faith in people, are also the ones that people find most untrustworthy.

EMPTINESS AND NOT-DOING (WU WEI)

Taciturnity is natural to man. A whirlwind never outlasts the morning, nor a violent rain the day. What is the cause? It is heaven and earth. If even heaven and earth are not constant, much less can man be.

Therefore he who pursues his affairs in the spirit of Tao will become Tao-like. He who pursues his affairs with teh, will become teh-like. He who pursues his affairs with loss, identifies himself with loss.

He who identifies himself with Tao, Tao rejoices to guide. He who identifies himself with teh, teh rejoices to reward. And he who identifies himself with loss, loss rejoices to ruin.

If his faith fail, he will receive no reward of faith.

Nature speaks (yen) little.

Hence a squall lasts not a whole morning,

A rainstorm continues not a whole day.

What causes (wei) these?

Heaven and earth.

Even [the actions of] heaven and earth do not last long,

How much less [the works] of humans?

Therefore one who follows Tao identifies with Tao,

One who follows te (nature) identifies with te (nature).

One who follows shih (loss) identifies with shih.

One who identifies with Tao is glad to be with Tao.

One who identifies with te is glad to be with te.

One who identifies with shih is glad to be with shih.

When you don't trust (hsin) (the people) enough,

Then they are untrustworthy (pu hsin).

Nature is sparing in its talk. Unusually high winds seldom last the whole morning; unusually heavy rains seldom last the whole day. And where do these things originate? Within nature. And if nature so spares its talk, how much more, then, should you?

Whoever follows Tao becomes as Tao. Whoever follows Teh becomes as Teh. Whoever abandons Tao or Teh will be abandoned by Tao and Teh.

Whoever seeks Tao is welcomed to Tao. Whoever seeks Teh is welcomed to Teh. Whoever seeks abandonment is welcomed by abandonment.

Much talk is contrary to nature.

The wind doesn't blow all morning.

The rain doesn't fall all day.

Wind and rain are caused by nature,

If nature restrains herself, shouldn't people do the same?

He who follows the Tao is one with the Tao.

He who is virtuous is one with Virtue [Te].

He who loses the Tao becomes a loss.

Surrender to the Tao, and it will be your home.

Practice virtue [Te], and it will be your abode.

Lose the Tao, and you will then reside in loss.

No trust given, no trust received.

Twenty-three

To talk little is natural.

High winds do not last all morning.

Heavy rain does not last all day.

Why is this? Heaven and Earth!

If heaven and Earth cannot make things eternal,

How is it possible for man?

He who follows the Tao

Is at one with the Tao.

He who is virtuous

Experiences Virtue.

He who loses the way

Is lost.

When you are at one with the Tao,

The Tao welcomes you.

When you are at one with Virtue,

The Virtue is always there.

When you are at one with loss,

The loss is experienced willingly.

He who does not trust enough

Will not be trusted.

To be taciturn is in accordance with nature,

So much as a wanton wind

Does not last all morning,

And a sudden rain does not last all day.

Who makes it?

Heaven and earth.

If heaven and earth cannot make it last long,

How can man?

So a man of Tao conforms to the Tao;

A man of Teh to the Teh;

A man of having neither to the principle of losing both above.

He who conforms to the Tao is readily received by the Tao;

He who conforms to the Teh is readily received by the Teh;

He who conforms to the principle of losing both above is readily discarded by the principle of loss.

The lack of faith on the part of the ruler

Leads to the lack of confidence in him on the part of the people.

Tzu-jan rarely speaks.

Therefore no windstorm lasts all morning;

No rainstorm lasts all day.

Who causes these things?

Heaven and Earth.

If even Heaven and Earth can cause nothing to last forever,

How could man?

Therefore those who follow Tao

Are one with Tao.

Those who attain Te are one with Te;

Those who lose [Te] are one with the loss.

When a man is one with Tao,

Tao also rejoices at gaining him;

When a man is one with Te,

Te also rejoices at gaining him;

When a man is one with the loss,

The loss also rejoices at gaining him.

When you don't trust others,

They will not trust you.

To be reticent is consistent with the law of nature.

Usually the hurricane does not last more than half a day.

And torrential rain does not pour for a whole day.

The wind and rain are the result of the forces of nature.

Even the forces of nature do not endure for long,

So how can human efforts ever match that of nature?

Those devoted to Dao will follow Dao, and those devoted to De will follow De.

On the contrary, those who go against Dao will manifest it in their behaviours.

Following the path of Dao, Dao is glad to accept you.

Following the path of De, De is pleased to welcome you.

Following the alternative path, the alternative entity is also happy to receive you.

If the people in power have no credibility, then the ordinary people will not trust them.

Emptiness and Non-Being

Hsu Wu

Nature is brief in its speech.

Thus a tempest does not last a whole morning,

Nor does a rainstorm last a whole day.

What is it that causes the wind and rain?

It is Heaven and Earth.

Even Heaven and Earth cannot be long in their outbursts.

How much the less can man in his!

Therefore, in the pursuit of Tao,

Those tending toward Tao will identify with Tao;

Those tending toward virtue will identify with virtue;

Those tending toward failure will identify with failure.

To those identified with Tao,

Tao will gladly extend welcome;

To those identified with virtue,

Virtue will gladly extend welcome;

To those identified with failure,

Failure will gladly extend welcome.

When one's own faith is inadequate,

It will not evoke faith from other people.

To be moderate in talk is according to nature.

A hurricane does not blow all morning;

A rain-storm does not last all day.

What is it that makes the wind to blow, the rain to pour down?

Heaven-and-Earth!

Is such actions as these of Heaven-and-Earth do not go on forever,

How much less should the actions of men!

Therefore: He who acts with the Tao is identified with the Tao;

He who acts in Virtue is identified with Virtue;

He who fails through abandoning Virtue is identified with failure.

Conform to the Tao, and the Tao will receive you gladly;

Identify yourself with Virtue, and Virtue will receive you gladly;

Identify yourself with failure, and failure will receive you gladly.

And truly, if your faith is not strong enough, you will not meet with faith.

Nature speaks little.

Squalls do not last the morning

Nor downpours the day.

What stirs them up

Heaven-and-earth!

Even heaven-and-earth

Does not long make a fuss.

How much less should men!

Therefore,

He who follows Tao is one with Tao.

He who follows virtue is one with virtue.

He who courts loss is one with his losses.

Tao is glad to get whoever comes to Tao.

Virtue is glad to get whoever comes to virtue.

Loss is glad to get whoever comes to loss.

When you are lacking in trust,

Others have no trust in you.

The utterance of the universal subtle law is too loud to be audible.

Look at this: a squall does not last the whole morning, nor does a torrential shower last the whole day.

What determines this?

Even Nature cannot make such violence last for long.

How long, then, can the violent actions of human beings last?

Hence, one who follows gentleness becomes one with universal truth.

One who follows wholeness becomes one with universal virtue.

One who separates himself from universal nature and from universal virtue becomes separate and lost.

When one is one with universal nature,

universal nature is one with him.

When one is one with universal virtue,

universal virtue is one with him.

When one deviates from universal nature,

deviation keeps him from universal nature.

If one does not know and believe that the subtle law manifests in his own life,

how can he have faith that it pervades the entire universe?

XXIII.

Emptiness:
Nothingness

Be
sparing of your speech, and so be self-contained,

A
violent wind will not outlast the morning,

A
pouring rain is gone before the day is done,

And
who is it that sends these notes of warning?

Tis
heaven and earth; if these, even, cannot so endure,

Much
less can man, the way of heaven scorning.

So
who pursues affairs with the Tao, with the Tao

Identifies
himself in all his doing,

And
who pursues affairs with its virtue, with its virtue

Identifies
himself in his pursuing,

And
who pursues affairs with its loss, with its loss

Identifies
himself, to his undoing.

Who identifies
himself with the Tao, the Tao s one,

Enjoys
the happiness of its attaining,

Who
identifies himself with its virtue, virtue s one,

Has
enjoyment of the virtue he is gaining.

Who
identifies himself with its loss, its loss s one,

Enjoys
the loss of it he is sustaining.

Faith
not sufficient will, indeed,

Faith
not receive in time of need.

With few words affirm the Self.

A great wind does not blow all the morning,

A heavy wind does not continue all day.

Why is this so?

It is because of the inter-relations of Heaven and Earth.

If Heaven and Earth cannot make things last long.

How much less can man?

Therefore he who follows the service of Tao is one with Tao,

He who is virtuous is one with Teh,

He who fails is one with failure.

He who is one with Tao,

Tao shall also claim him.

He who is one with Teh

Teh shall also claim him.

He who is one with failure,

Failure shall also claim him.

Faith that is not complete is not faith.

Only
simple and

quiet
words will

ripen
of themselves.

For
a whirlwind

does
not last a

whole
morning.

A
sudden rain

does
not last

a
whole day.

Who
is their creator?

Heaven-and-Earth!

Even
Heaven-and-Earth

cannot
make such

violent
things

last
long;

The
same is true of the

reckless
efforts of humans.

Who
helps the Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

is
one with the Tao (the Laws of the Universe);

Who
thinks with Power

is
one with Power;

And
who seeks the hand of loss

is
one with Loss.

To
be one with

the
Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

is
to be a welcome addition to

the
Tao (the Laws of the Universe);

To
be one with Power

is
to be a welcome addition

to
Power;

To
be one with Loss

is
to be a welcome addition

to
Loss.

Failure
of faith

on
your part

Creates
faithlessness

on
the part of others.

To be brief of word is the natural (course).

For a whirlwind does not last all morning, nor does a rainstorm last all day. Who is it that makes these? Heaven and earth. Now if even heaven and earth cannot make (such exuberance) lasting, how much less man!

Therefore he who follows the Way in his actions, identifies himself with the Way. If he succeeds, he identifies himself with success; if he fails, he identifies himself with failure.

If he identifies himself with the Way, he rejoices on obtaining the Way. IF he identifies himself with success, he likewise rejoices on obtaining success. If he identifies himself with failure, he also rejoices on obtaining failure.

Abstaining from speech marks him who is obeying the spontaneity

of his nature. A violent wind does not last for a whole morning; a

sudden rain does not last for the whole day. To whom is it that these

(two) things are owing? To Heaven and Earth. If Heaven and Earth

cannot make such (spasmodic) actings last long, how much less can man!

Therefore
when one is making the Tao his business, those who are

also pursuing it, agree with him in it, and those who are making the

manifestation of its course their object agree with him in that; while

even those who are failing in both these things agree with him where

they fail.

Hence,
those with whom he agrees as to the Tao have the happiness

of attaining to it; those with whom he agrees as to its manifestation

have the happiness of attaining to it; and those with whom he agrees

in their failure have also the happiness of attaining (to the Tao).

(But) when there is not faith sufficient (on his part), a want of

faith (in him) ensues (on the part of the others).

To be sparing of speech is natural.
A
whirlwind does last all morning;
A downpour does not last all day.. and who
causes THEM?
If Heaven and Earth cannot express such things ceaselessly,

how much less so can human beings?!
Therefore,
in pursuing his own affairs;
A
person like THOU identifies with THOU.
A person like DEITY identifies with
DEITY.
A person who fails has identified with failure.
To
one who identifies with DEITY, THOU awards divinity.
To one who identifies
with failure, THOU awards failure.

Say
your piece and then be still

Like nature in a storm

That rains and blows and ceases

And sees the sun reborn

Open
to the inward view

You are at one with all existence

There's nothing blocking up the way

Or putting up resistance

If
you're at home with nothingness

And simply trust what comes about

You'll find that all is in its place

Without a question or a doubt

ONLY simple and quiet words will ripen of themselves.

For a whirlwind does not last a whole morning,

Nor does a sudden shower last a whole day.

Who is their author? Heaven-and-Earth!

Even Heaven-and-Earth cannot make such violent things last long;

How much truer is it of the rash endeavours of men?

Hence, he who cultivates the Tao is one with the Tao;

He who practices Virtue is one with Virtue;

And he who courts after Loss is one with Loss.

To be one with the Tao is to be a welcome accession to the Tao;

To be one with Virtue is to be a welcome accession to Virtue;

To be one with Loss is to be a welcome accession to Loss.

Deficiency of faith on your part

Entails faithlessness on the part of others.

Nature says only a few words:

To speak little is natural.

Express yourself completely,

and then keep quiet.

Be like the forces of nature:

a gale seldom blows the whole morning,

nor does a downpour last a whole day.

When the clouds pass, the sun shines through.

If nature's words do not last,

why should those of man?

If you open yourself to the Tao,

you are at one with the Tao

and you can embody it completely.

If you open yourself to insight,

you are at one with insight

and you can use it completely.

If you open yourself to loss,

you are at one with loss

and you can accept it completely.

The Tao accepts this accordance gladly.

Virtue accepts this accordance gladly.

Loss also accepts this accordance gladly.

He who does not have trust in others

should not himself be trusted.

Nature uses few words:

when the gale blows, it will not last long;

when it rains hard, it lasts but a little while;

What causes these to happen? Heaven and Earth.

Why
do we humans go on endlessly about little

when nature does much in a little time?

If you open yourself to the Tao,

you and Tao become one.

If you open yourself to Virtue,

then you can become virtuous.

If you open yourself to loss,

then you will become lost.

If
you open yourself to the Tao,

the Tao will eagerly welcome you.

If you open yourself to virtue,

virtue will become a part of you.

If you open yourself to loss,

the lost are glad to see you.

"When
you do not trust people,

people will become untrustworthy."

The wise leader speaks rarely and briefly. After all, no other natural outpouring goes on and on. It rains and then it stops. It thunders and then it stops.

The leader teaches more through being than through doing. The quality of one's silence conveys more than long speeches.

Be still. Follow your inner wisdom. In order to know your inner wisdom, you have to be still.

The leader who knows how to be still and feel deeply will probably be effective. Bu the leader who chatters and boasts and tries to impress the group has no center and carries little weight.

Tao works for those who follow Tao. God serves those who serve God. When you are in touch with the single principle, your actions will be effective. But if you are simply being egocentric, or if you are just trying to be dramatic, you will neither do good nor look good.

Remember that the method is awareness-of-process. Reflect. Be still.

What do you deeply feel?

Nature uses few words.

So, a whirlwind will not last All morning.

A sudden storm will not last All day.

What causes these?

Heaven and Earth.

If Heaven and Earth need not speak for long,

How much less should humankind?

Therefore, one who seeks the Tao is at one with the Tao.

One who seeks goodness is good.

One who seeks loss is lost.

If you are one with the Tao, the Tao eagerly accepts you.

If you are one with goodness, goodness is happy to receive you.

If you are one with loss, loss welcomes you.

If you do not trust enough, you will not find trust.

To
seldom speak is the essence of simplicity.

The
winds do not last all morning.

The rain does not last all day.

The earth that manifests the winds and the rain

is itself a manifestation of change.

All
things change, nothing is eternal but change.

All the manifestations of humanity are fleeting

as is the entire physical universe.

Keep
your focus on the oneness of Infinity,

manifesting the potential of all things

and disintegrating all the manifestations.

Flow in the peace and harmony of eternal

change.

Focus
on goodness and virtue and you lose

sight of the oneness of all people.

Focus on failure and your life becomes failure.

Focus on peace and harmony, the essence of

Infinity, and experience peace and harmony.

Embrace
change and live in peace.

Embrace the experience of the moment,

refuse to distinguish good and bad,

happy and sad, difficult and easy.

What
you distinguish comes to you for a time.

When it comes embrace it

and when it leaves let it go.

This is living within the oneness of the Infinite.

This is the key to peace and harmony.

Strive to express oneself correctly.

Just as a windstorm does not last all morning,

a sudden rain does not last all day.

What controls this is Heaven and Earth.

Even Heaven and Earth cannot make it last, so how can men ?

Therefore conduct affairs according to the Way.

The Taoist identifies with Tao.

The virtuous man identifies with Virtue.

The failure identifies with Loss.

Whoever identifies with Tao, must also love Tao.

Whoever identifies with Virtue, must also love Virtue.

Whoever identifies with Loss, must also love Loss.

The dishonest are not trusted.

To speak little is natural.

A high wind will not last all morning,

And a sudden downpour will not last all day.

And why is this?

Heaven and Earth have made it so.

If Heaven and Earth cannot make things which last forever,

How much less is it possible for man?

Therefore those who follow the Tao will be at one with the Tao.

Those who exercise Virtue will be at one with Virtue.

Those who lose them will be at one with their loss.

At one with the Tao, Tao welcomes you.

At one with Virtue, Virtue welcomes you.

At one with your loss, loss welcomes you.

Those who do not trust others

Will not themselves be trusted.

The ruler by nature says few words.

A sudden wind cannot last the whole morning.

A sudden rain cannot last the whole day.

Who produces them?

Heaven and Earth.

Since even Heaven and Earth cannot start a lasting cause,

How can mankind achieve that?

Therefore,

Those choosing the Way identify themselves with the Way,

Those choosing uses identify themselves with using,

And those choosing losses identity themselves with losing.

One identified with the Way is gladly provided by the Way.

One identified with using is gladly provided with uses.

One identified with losing suffers from the loss of the Way.

One who does not believe will find one's self not believed.

Speaking little is what is natural. Yes: A whirlwind does not blow a whole morning a downpour does not fall a whole day.

And who causes these things? - Heaven and Earth. If even Heaven and Earth cannot make things last very long, how much less can man.

Yes: One devoted to Tao: Is a Tao man, merges with Tao is a Te man, merges with Te is a man left out, merges with What Is Left Out.

One who merges with Tao, Tao welcomes him one who merges with Te, Te welcomes him one who merges with What Is Left Out, What Is Left Out welcomes him.

When sincerity does not suffice, it was not sincerity.

Speak less and be simple!

Strong wind does not blow all the morning; strong rain does not continue all day long. What does this depend on? On the sky and earth.

The sky and earth, though large, cannot give birth to anything eternal. Neither can man. Therefore, it is better to serve Eternal Tao.

He who serves Tao with his deeds receives the right to attain Mergence with It.

He who refined himself* to the state of Te becomes coessential to Te.

He who refined himself to the state of Tao becomes coessential to Tao.

He who is coessential to Te gains the bliss of Te.

He who is coessential to Tao gains the bliss of Tao.

Yet if he ceases to be deserving — he is deprived of this.

It is unwise to doubt this truth!

* Refined the consciousness (soul).

By speaking less I am at rest.

The wind, the tempest don't last too long,

Like everything in nature the man don't last long too.

The
one following the Tao Way becomes identical with Tao,

The one following the Virtue becomes identical with Virtue (Te).

Those lost are one with the lost things,

Those unable to believe, they cannot be believed either.

To
be taciturn is the way of nature. For a gale cannot last the whole morning.
A torrential rain cannot last the entire day. What makes them? Heaven and Earth.
How can humans make things endure for long when not even Heaven and Earth can
do so? So in engaging in activities, those who act in accord with the Dao are
akin to the Dao, those who act in accord with Virtue are akin to Virtue, and
those who act in accord with Loss are akin to Loss. Those who act in accord
with the Dao are welcomed by the Dao. Those who act in accord with Virtue are
welcomed by Virtue. Those who act in accord with Loss are welcomed by Loss.

"When
trust is inadequate, there will be untrustworthiness.''

To spare words is to be natural.

Therefore a whirlwind does not last all morning,

And a sudden shower does not last all day.

Who causes this?

Heaven and earth.

If even Heaven and earth cannot last long,

What can man do?

Therefore one dealing with Tao will resemble Tao.

Dealing with virtue, one will resemble virtue.

Dealing with loss, one will resemble loss.

If one resembles Tao, Tao is pleased to accept him.

If one resembles virtue, virtue is pleased to accept him.

If one resembles loss, loss is also pleased to accept him.

By not having enough credibility,

One will not be trusted [by others].

The Steady Force of Attitude

Nature rarely speaks.

Hence the whirlwind does not last a whole morning,

Nor the sudden rainstorm last a whole day.

What causes these?

Heaven and Earth.

If Heaven and Earth cannot make them long lasting,

How much less so can humans?

Thus, those who cultivate the Tao

Identify with the Tao.

Those who cultivate Power

Identify with Power.

Those who cultivate failure

Identify with failure.

Those who identify with the Tao

Are likewise welcomed by the Tao.

Those who identify with Power

Are likewise welcomed by Power.

Those who identify with failure

Are likewise welcomed by failure.

Those who lack belief

Will not in turn be believed.

Live your life with your heart. Meditate in this valley. When the wind brushes your face, be only with the wind. When the rain comes off the mountain, be only with the rain. You with your loved ones, be only with them. Accept, use and embody everything completely.

Sparing indeed is nature of its talk:

The whirlwind will not last the morning out;

The cloudburst ends before the day is done.

What is it that behaves itself like this?

The earth and sky! And if it be that these

Cut short their speech, how much more yet should man!

If
you work by the Way,

You will be of the Way;

If you work through its virtue

you will be given the virtue;

Abandon either one

And both abandon you.

Gladly
then the Way receives

Those who choose to walk in it;

Gladly too its power upholds

Those who choose to use it well;

Gladly will abandon greet

Those who to abandon drift.

Little
faith is put in them

Whose faith is small.

Saying few words fits in with Nature.

Therefore a whirlwind does not last a whole morning,

Nor does a rainstorm last a whole day.

Whoever makes them like this?

It is Heaven and Earth.

If (the fierce force of) Heaven and Earth cannot last long,

How much less man?

Therefore he who follows Tao (should know:)

The seeker of Tao is identified with Tao.

The seeker of De is identified with De,

He who seeks the loss (of Tao) is identified with loss.

He who is identified with Tao -

Tao is also happy to have him.

He who is identified with De -

De is also happy to have him.

He who is identified with the loss -

The loss is also happy to have him.

Only when one has no faith will faithless events take place.

The "inaudible" is a way of referring to the Natural.

Thus a whirlwind does not last an entire morning, and a rainstorm does not last an entire day.

What is it that causes them?

It is Heaven and Earth.

If even Heaven and Earth cannot make them last long, how much less can man?

Thus, to undertake things in accordance with the Dao, the man of Dao becomes one with the Dao.

The man of virtue becomes one with virtue.

The man of failure becomes one with failure.

He who becomes one with virtue, the Dao also endows with virtue;

he who becomes one with failure, the Dao also endows with failure.

If one fails to have trust, a corresponding lack of trust in him occurs.

1. To rarely speak—such is [the way of] Nature.

2. Fierce winds don't last the whole morning;

3. Torrential rains don't last the whole day.

4. Who makes these things?

5. If even Heaven and Earth can't make these last long—

6. How much the more is this true for man?!

7.
Therefore, one who devotes himself to the Way is one with the Way;

8. One who [devotes himself to] Virtue is one with that Virtue;

9. And one who [devotes himself to] losing is one with that loss.

10. To the one who is one with Virtue, the Way also gives Virtue;

11. While for the one who is one with his loss, the Way also disregards him.

When you have
nothing to say,

you may as well keep your mouth shut.

The wind and the rain don't last forever.

If nature knows enough to give it a rest sometimes,

so should you.

If you're ready
for Tao, you can live with Tao.

If you're ready to succeed, you can live with success.

If you're ready to fail, you can live with failure.

Trust your instincts,
and others will trust you.

.

Nature

Nature says few words.

A whirlwind does not last all morning,

nor does a rainstorm last a whole day.

What causes them? Nature.

If even Nature's utterances do not last long,

how much less should human beings'?

Those who follow the Way are one with the Way.

Those who follow power are one with power.

Those who abandon it are one with abandonment.

Those one with the Way are welcomed by the Way.

Those one with power are welcomed by power.

Those one with abandonment are welcomed by abandonment.

Those who lack trust will not be trusted.

Speaking rarely means following nature:

A hurricane does not last all morning a cloudburst not a day.

As these utterances of heaven and earth are of short duration so shouldn't be man's.

For more than outer life and utterance is the inner life:

One who lets Tao act through him is guided by Tao.

One who follows virtue is determined by it.

One who turns outward and follows outer things is determined from outside and has no stability.

If you are one with Tao Tao will serve you willingly.

If you are one with virtue its fruits will falls into your lap.

If you are one with the world your companion is want.

From where your trust flows an answer will be given you.

Be Less, This Is The Spontaneous Rule

Lao Tze says,

Be less, this is the spontaneous rule.

Hence a gusty wind does not persist through all morning.

A sudden downpour does not persist through a whole day.

Who makes them so?

The Heaven and the Earth.

Even the Heaven and the Earth don't like to perform a long work, what more can be expected from men?

Thus,

Whoever devotes himself to the Tao will know the Tao's essence.

Whoever devotes himself to the Teh will know the Teh's essence.

Whoever devotes to the loss will know the loss's essence.

Whoever matches the Tao's essence will find pleasure in the Tao.

Whoever matches the Teh's essence will find pleasure in the Teh.

Whoever matches the loss will find pleasure in the loss.

Those men who can't believe what I said already have disbelieving hearts.

ACCEPTING THE IRREVOCABLE

Nature's
way is to say but little;

high winds are made still

with the turn of the tide,

and rarely last all morning,

nor heavy rain, all day.

Therefore, when talking,

remember also

to be silent and still.

He
who follows the natural way

is always one with the Tao.

He who is virtuous may experience virtue,

whilst he who loses the natural way

is easily lost himself.

He
who is at one with the Tao

is at one with nature,

and virtue always exists for he who has virtue.

To
accept the irrevocable

is to let go of desire.

He
who does not have trust in others

should not himself be trusted.

Express yourself completely,

then keep quiet.

Be like the forces of nature:

when it blows, there is only wind;

when it rains, there is only rain;

when the clouds pass, the sun shines through.

If you open yourself to the Tao,

you are at one with the Tao

and you can embody it completely.

If you open yourself to insight,

you are at one with insight

and you can use it completely.

If you open yourself to loss,

you are at one with loss

and you can accept it completely.

Open yourself to the Tao,

then trust your natural responses;

and everything will fall into place.

Let us observe nature:

A heavy rain can hardly outlast the morning;

a violent hurricane can hardly outlast the day.

Who is responsible for this?

The Heaven and the earth - the Nature.

If the Heaven and the earth however can not make things great and lasting, how could a man expect to do even more?

Thus one who practices Dao is in accord with Dao.

One who is in accord with virtues thus attains virtues.

One who is not in accord with Dao loses Dao.

One who is not in accord with virtues loses virtues.

Truth alone is not enough, nevertheless some truth is not true.

Natural speech consists of few words.

Gusty winds do not last all morning,

Cloudbursts do not last all day.

What makes this so?

Heaven and earth will not last forever,

How could a human being last!

So the person who works according to Tao unites with Tao.

In the same way he unites with action.

In the same way he unites with loss.

Uniting with action, the Tao becomes action.

Uniting with loss, the Tao becomes loss.

XXIII

Nature
rarely speaks

Gales don't last more than a morning

Downpours don't last more than a day

If heaven and earth can't make things last

How much truer is this for us?

So,
to follow the way you must be like the way

When the time comes to act, act well

When the time comes to lose, let go

Act well and the tao will supply you

Let go and the tao will carry on

To Speak Rarely Is Natural

To speak rarely is natural.

That is why a gusty wind doesn't last the morning,

a downpour of rain doesn't last the day.

Who does this? Heaven and earth.

If even heaven and earth cannot go on forever,

how much less can human beings!

Therefore those who follow the Way assimilate to the Way;

the virtuous assimilate to virtue,

those who have lost assimilate to loss.

Those who assimilate to the Way are happy to gain it,

those who assimilate to virtue too are happy to gain it,

and those who assimilate to loss are also happy to gain it.

When trust is insufficient, there is distrust.

Preaching less conforms to the natural way.

A squall rarely lasts a whole morning.

A downpour rarely continues all the day.

Who makes the wind and rain?

It is the nature.

If the nature cannot have long-lasting stamina, how can people?

Therefore, those who follow Tao live with Tao.

Those who follow Te live with Te.

Those who follow nothing live with nothing.

Those who live with Tao are happy with Tao.

Those who live with Te are happy with Te.

Those who live with nothing abandon Tao.

There are people who are not whole-heartedly Tao-believer.

There are people who do not believe in Tao at all.

Few words fit Nature.

For a whirlwind does not last a whole morning, nor does a sudden shower last a whole day.

Who is their author?

Heaven and earth.

Even Heaven and earth cannot make their things last long; how is it possible for the works of men?

Hence, he who cultivates the Way is one with the Way; he who practices Virtue is one with Virtue; and he who loses the Way is one with Loss.

To be one with the Way: the Way welcomes it.

To be one with Virtue: Virtue welcomes it.

To be one with Loss: Loss welcomes it.

If it is not enough to get faith, there is no faith.

An analogy about Nature.

High winds do not last all morning.

Heavy rain does not last all day.

Who are doing these (wind and rain)? Heaven and Earth.

If heaven and earth cannot make things eternal,

how is it possible for man?

He who follows the Tao, same as Tao.

He who is virtuous, same as virtue.

He who loses the way, got lost.

At one with the Tao, Tao welcomes you.

At one with Virtue, Virtue follows you.

At one with lost, loss always accompany you.

The loss is experienced willingly.

He who does not trust, will not be trusted.

To talk little is to follow nature.

A
whirlwind does not last all morning.

A sudden shower does not last all day.

Who produces these things?

Heaven and earth!

Even heaven and earth cannot make

wild things last long.

How then can people hope to do so?

People
of the Tao

conform to the Tao.

People of Virtue

conform to Virtue.

People who lose the way

conform to the loss.

Those who conform to the Tao

are welcomed into the Tao.

Those who conform to Virtue

are welcomed into Virtue.

Those who conform to the loss

are welcomed into the loss.

Those
who do not trust enough

will not be trusted.

Silence
is our natural state.

Tornadoes don't last all afternoon, nor rainstorms all day.

Stars collapse and planets decay.

Does somebody create these things?

No.

It is the nature of universe.

And if neither the universe nor the earth

can make something last forever, how can humanity?

So
it is that those who use natural law as their teacher

will be at one with nature and the universe.

Truth to truth, power to power.

Let go of truth or power, and both will let go of you,

weakness to weakness.

For
those who take the path of natural law,

nature is always giving.

For those who take the path of human order and control,

disorder and chaos will be everywhere.

As
you trust in the universe

so will you be trusted by others.

To be always talking goes against nature.

For the same reason a good whirlwind never lasts the whole morning, nor a swell
rainstorm the whole day.

The wind and rain emerge from nature. And if even nature can't blow, last or
pour for long, how much less should man-given tenets?

So, he who takes to or follows (one) dao, becomes merged with (this) dao. Or
if one uses dao as one's instrument, the results will be like dao.

Who follows virtue, is soaked by it. If one uses the power" as one's instrument,
the results will be like the power.

If one uses whats the reverse of the power",

the results will be the reverse of the power".

Who is dao identified, could be glad as well. For to those who have conformed
themselves to dao, dao readily lends its power.

To those who have conformed themselves to the power, the power readily lends
more power.

While to those who conform themselves to inefficacy, inefficacy readily lends
its ineffectiveness.

Who has not enough faith will not be able to get faith. Or:

"By not believing in people you turn them into liars."

To be sparing of speech is natural.

A whirlwind does not last the whole morning,

A downpour does not last the whole day.

Who causes them?

If even heaven and earth cannot cause them to persist, how much less can human beings?

Therefore,

In pursuing his affairs,

a man of the Way identifies with the Way,

a man of integrity identifies with integrity,

a man who fails identifies with failure.

To him who identifies with integrity, the Way awards integrity;

To him who identifies with failure, the Way awards failure.

Moderate your speech, and preserve yourself.

A hurricane will not outlast the morning, a heavy rain will not outlast the day.

Who have the power to make these things but Heaven and Earth?

And if Heaven and Earth cannot continue them long, how shall a man do so?

If a man accords with Tao in all things, he is identified with Tao by that agreement.

A virtuous man is identified with virtue, a vicious man is identified with vice.

Whoever is identified with Tao, him do the Taoists receive with gladness.

Whoever is identified with virtue, him do the virtuous receive with gladness.

But whoever is identified with vice, him do the vicious gladly serve with vice.

For wherever confidence is lacking, it is not met with trust.

Live Your Emotions Fully

Live your moods fully and appropriately

and your beloved will receive the gift

of who you truly are.

Let your anger be honest, brief, and compassionate,

not fueled by lingering resentment.

Let your joy be rich and hearty,

filled with laughter and dance.

Let your grief be open and full

and your tears will be a cleansing rain.

This is the natural way of things.

By acknowledging and revealing your feelings

in honest non-hurtful ways,

you give a gift of wholeness

to both you and your beloved.

Are you restricting your relationship

by repressing either joy or sorrow?

Is hidden anger turning to resentment?

Who are you trying to fool?

Nature says few words. For the same reason a whirlwind does not last a whole morning. Nor does a rainstorm last a whole day.

What causes them? It is Heaven and Earth (Nature). If even Heaven and
Earth cannot make them last long, How much less can man?

Therefore he who follows Tao is identified with Tao. He who follows
virtue is identified with virtue. He who abandons (Tao) is identified
with the abandonment (of Tao). He who is identified with Tao - Tao is
also happy to have him.

He who is identified with virtue - virtue is also happy to have him.
And he who is identified with the abandonment (of Tao) - the abandonment
(of Tao) is also happy to abandon him.

Those who lack trust will not be trusted. It is only when one does not
have enough faith in others that others will have no faith in him.

Nature does
not have to insist,

Can blow for only half a morning,

Rain for only half a day,

And what are these winds and these rains but natural?

If nature does not have to insist,

Why should man?

It is natural too

That whoever follows the way of life feels alive,

That whoever uses it properly feels well used,

Whereas he who loses the way of life feels lost,

That whoever keeps to the way of life

Feels at home,

Whoever uses it properly

Feels welcome,

Whereas he who uses it improperly

Feels improperly used:

'Fail to honor people,

They fail to honor you.

Talking little is the way of nature.

A blustering wind cannot last a whole morning;

A downpour cannot last a whole day.

Who can control this? Only nature.

Even nature cannot make a storm last long, so how can people?

Therefore, one who believes in the DAO receives the DAO,

One who pursues the DE has the DE,

One who does not believe in anything is lost.

The one who gets the DAO will receive the blessings of the DAO,

The one who has the DE will receive the blessings of the DE,

The one who is lost will receive nothing.

If you do not have faith in the DAO, the DAO will not have faith in you.

To be silent is natural, for silence alone endures in Nature.

A whirlwind does not last the whole morning;

Nor does a downpour last the whole day.

Nature cannot make her commotion last;

Nor can human beings make their commotion last.

Therefore, in enduring silence, without commotion,

The master creates harmony with all humanity,

Sharing the experience of the Tao with those who embody the Tao;

Sharing the experience of virtue with those who practice virtue;

Sharing the experience of loss with those who lose virtue.

Thereby, in sharing the experience,

Those who embody the Tao enjoy his company;

Those who practice virtue enjoy his company;

Those who lose virtue enjoy his company.

The master is silent, for he knows the Tao and trusts the universe.

Therefore, be silent, then you will be enduring;

Trust, then you will be trusted.

The ruler by nature says few words.

A sudden wind cannot last the whole morning.

A sudden rain cannot last the whole day.

Who produces them?

Heaven and Earth.

Since even Heaven and Earth cannot start a lasting cause,

How can mankind achieve that?

Therefore,

Those choosing the Way identify themselves with the Way,

Those choosing uses identify themselves with using,

And those choosing losses identity themselves with losing.

One identified with the Way is gladly provided by the Way.

One identified with using is gladly provided with uses.

One identified with losing suffers from the loss of the Way.

One who does not believe will find one's self not believed.

Nature says only a few words:

To speak little is natural.

Express yourself completely,

and then keep quiet.

Be like the forces of nature:

a gale seldom blows the whole morning,

nor does a downpour last a whole day.

When the clouds pass, the sun shines through.

If nature's words do not last,

why should those of man?

If you open yourself to the Tao,

you are at one with the Tao

and you can embody it completely.

If you open yourself to insight,

you are at one with insight

and you can use it completely.

If you open yourself to loss,

you are at one with loss

and you can accept it completely.

The Tao accepts this accordance gladly.

Virtue accepts this accordance gladly.

Loss also accepts this accordance gladly.

He who does not have trust in others

should not himself be trusted.

