===== Chapter 2 =====

Everyone in the world knows the being of beautiful to be beautiful.

Thus is ugliness completed.

Everyone knows the being of good to be good.

Thus is evil completed.

Therefore:

Being and non-being give birth to each other.

Difficulty and ease complete each other.

Long and short form each other.

High and low lean on each other.

Notes and music harmonize each other.

Forward and behind follow each other.

Therefore, the sages reside in the function of "non-action"

And practice the teaching of no words.

The ten-thousand things work in many senses and are not dismissed.

Create but do not possess.

Act but do not presume.

Achieve goals but do not dwell on them.

It's only because one does not dwell on success

That success therefore does not leave.

Recognize beauty and ugliness is born.

Recognize good and evil is born.

Is and Isn't produce each other. Hard depends on easy, Long is tested by short,

High is determined by low, Sound is harmonized by voice, After is followed by before.

Therefore the sage is devoted to non action, Moves without teaching,

Creates ten thousand things without instruction, Lives but does not own, Acts but does not presume,

Accomplishes without taking credit. When no credit is taken, Accomplishment endures.

To everyone in the world

Beauty seems beautiful because there is ugliness.

Goodness seems good because there is wickedness

Thus having and not having beget one another.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

The long and the short give rise to each other.

The high and the low support each other.

The voice and the sound harmonize each other.

Front and back follow one another.

Thus the sage manages affairs without taking action

And spreads his teaching without using words.

The myriad things flourish where he is

And he does not forsake them.

The sage creates but he does not possess.

He toils but expects no praise.

He does his work but does not dwell on his achievements.

It's because he does not dwell on them

That his achievements lasts.

RELATIVENESS

Beauty becomes recognized as beauty,

As its difference from ugliness is seen.

Likewise,

Goodness and love become recognized,

As their difference from evil and hatred is felt.

The Relationship of:

- Being and non-being is known through life and growth.

- Difficult and easy is known through achievement and completion.

- Long and short is known through form and contrast.

- High and low is known through relationship and position.

- Sound and voice is known through amplitude and harmony.

- Front and behind is known through position and sequence.

Thus:

Wu-Wei graces the affairs of the Sage -

Teaching gracefully, Without words.

Receiving all happening as natural,

Without needing to judge or control.

Giving life and animation to all experience

Without needing to dominate.

Accomplishing, Without expecting reward.

In never assuming importance,

When the Sage's work is complete,

It remains, everlastingly.

In Heaven below (the sacred body) everyone recognizes beauty as beauty when ugly-heartedness ends.

Everyone recognizes virtue as virtue when lack of virtue ends.

Being and not being, together they give life.

Difficult and easy, together they complete.

Long and short, together they compare.

High and low, together they support.

Tone and voice, together they harmonize.

Front and back, together they follow each other.

The sages stay without action in their activities.

They practice silence in their teachings.

Ten-thousand things (everything) arise and they do not refuse.

They give life and do not hold onto it.

They achieve and do not take credit.

What is achieved continues on its own merit.

The masters agree not to dwell on their achievements.

Their accomplishments never cease.

THE ENERGY - SOURCE OF THE SELF

All men know that beauty and ugliness are correlatives, as are skill and

clumsiness; one implies and suggests the other.

So
also existence and non-existence pose the one the other;

so also is it with ease and difficulty, length and shortness; height and

lowness. Also Musick exists through harmony of opposites;

time and space depend upon contraposition.

By
the use of this method, the sage can fulfil his will without action,

and utter his word without speech.

All
things arise without diffidence; they grow, and none interferes; they

change according to their natural order, without lust of result. The

work is accomplished; yet continueth in its orbit, without goal. This

work is done unconsciously; this is why its energy is indefatigable.

Only when man recognizes beauty as such does ugliness become reality.Only when man recognizes goodness as such does evil become reality. Because:being and nothingness began as one. Weight and weightlessness cannot existalone. Distance and brevity prove each other and so do height and depth.Tune and voice abound together and past and present flow into one. Thereforethe Sage remains in serenity whatever happens and silently does his teaching.As matters proceed, the Sage is not irritated. He works but wants no possessions.He acts but does not linger at single things. He creates but does not hangon a single word and because he is not tied to It, he will never miss It.

When people think `this ́ is beautiful, they must think `that ́ is ugly

When people say `this ́ is good, than they have to say `that ́ is evil

This is Inevitable

People create a false reality out of the real one

Hard and easy are relative

Long and short depend upon each other

High and low are determined by a position

Sound and voice need one another

Before and beyond assume a point of view

That's why a wise man acts without intentions

And won't decide for others what to do

He'll let anything happen as it happens

He won't consider what he does as his own merit

And only therein is he praiseworthy

It is because we single out something and treat it as distinct from other things that we get the idea of its opposite. Beauty, for example, once distinguished, suggests its opposite, ugliness.

And goodness, when we think of it, is naturally opposed to badness.

In face, all distinctions naturally appear as opposites. And opposites get their meaning from each other and find their completion only through each other. The meaning of "is" and "is not" arise from our distinguishing between them.

Likewise "difficult and easy," "long and short," "high and low," "loud and soft," "before and after" - all derive their meanings from each other.

Therefore the intelligent man accepts what is as it is. In seeking to grasp what is, he does not devote himself to the making of distinctions which are then mistaken to be separate existences. In teaching, he teaches, not by describing and pointing out differences, but by example. Whatever is exists, and he sees that nothing is gained by representing what fully exists by a description - another lesser, diluted kind of existence. If something exists which cannot be wholly revealed to him with his viewpoint, he does not demand of it that it be nothing but what it seems to him.

If some one else interprets him, he does not trust that interpretation as being equal to his own existence. If some part of him stands out as if a superior representative of his nature, he will not surrender the rest of his nature to it.

And in not surrendering the whole of his nature to any part of it, he keeps himself intact. This is how the intelligent man preserves his nature.

It is because every one under Heaven recognizes beauty as beauty,

That the idea of ugliness exists.

And equally if every one recognized virtue as virtue,

this would merely create fresh conceptions of wickedness.

For truly, Being and Not-being grow out of one another;

Difficult and easy complete one another.

Long and short test one another;

High and low determine one another.

Pitch and mode give harmony to one another.

Front and back give sequence to one another.

Therefore the Sage relies on actionless activity,

Carries on wordless teaching,

But the myriad creatures are worked upon by him;

He does not disown them.

He rears them, but does not lay claim to them,

Controls them, but does not lean upon them,

Achieves his aim, but does not call attention to what he does;

And for the very reason that he does not call attention to what he does

He is not ejected from fruition of what he has done.

Judging beauty creates ugliness.

Defining good creates evil.

All and void arise together.

Hard and soft,

long and short,

high and low,

sound and silence,

now and then.

Opposites exist because of each other.

Therefore the sage acts by not-doing and teaches no-thought.

The ten thousand things arise and vanish without him.

He works without motive,

indifferent to outcome.

Because there is no doer,

his actions are timeless.

All under heaven know the beauty of things as beauty

So ugliness is already there

All know the good of things as the good

So the not-good is already there

And so being and nothingness beget each other

Difficult & easy complete each other

Lasting & brief define each other

High & low rely on each other

Tone & voice resonate with each other

Before & after follow each other

This is how wise ones abide without interfering with the work,

Practice without speaking their doctrine

A myriad beings emerge here, but without explanation

Are produced, but with no claims

Are developed, but with no expectations

Works are accomplished, but with no dwelling

Insofar as there is no dwelling

This means there is no departure

Qualities

When everyone in the world can see beauty as beauty

Than ugliness comes into being.

When everyone knows good as good

Than evil comes into being.

Therefore having and not having arise together.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short contrast each other:

High and low rest upon each other;

Voice and sound harmonize each other;

Front and back follow one another;

These are all constants.

Therefore the sage goes about doing nothing,

And practices the wordless teaching.

The ten thousand things rise and fall without cease,

But he does not begin them.

He acts on their behalf, yet not taking credit.

When he has done the work, then he forgets about it.

Therefore it lasts forever and it does not leave him.

When people find one thing beautiful, another consequently becomes ugly.

When one man is held up as good, another is judged deficient.

Similarly, being and non-being balance each other; difficult and easy define each other; long and short illustrate each other;

high and low rest upon each other; voice and song meld into harmony; what is to come follows upon what has been.

The wise person acts without effort and teaches by quiet example.

He accepts things as they come, creates without possessing, nourishes without demanding, accomplishes without taking credit.

Because he constantly forgets himself, he is never forgotten.

Ego is the mud thrown into Nature's water:

It lusts for beauty and reviles ugliness.

It projects a stain that was never there.

It grasps after the Good,

And thus affirms Evil.

Yet in the eye of the universe,

The formed and the formless

Create and support each other.

The light and the dark dance and mingle

Like the breath of lovers.

Erase the division: act but don't strive.

Teach but do not peddle pedantry.

The Sage guides without speaking,

Works through us in innocence,

Free of demand or expectation.

Thus is its work made great-

Enduring.

In this poem, Lao Tzu asks us to step out of the realms of division and opposition, by examining ourselves through the projections that we may have accepted from the forces of collective acculturation. Here the poet asks a question that will appear several more times in different metaphorical guises throughout the Tao Te Ching: "is it necessary to live on a treadmill of fortune, sliding from one polar opposite to another, and struggling to be on the right side at the right time?" Is this how the Cosmos truly works?

Then, as he always does in his poems, Lao Tzu offers us an alternative inner model: one of complementarity, represented in the images of dance and love. Lao Tzu discards the notion of some inherent cosmological conflict of polar opposites and presents instead a picture of Nature as the commingling and transformation of complementary principles, each of which honors its natural complement while retaining its individuality. There is no need to attach to beauty and reject ugliness, to elevate virtue and repress evil, for these divisions do not adhere to the Cosmic Whole.

Lao Tzu saw beauty and truth as so deeply connected as to be identical—complementary principles in mutual embrace. Two thousand years later, the great English poet John Keats felt the same reality, and sang of it in another timeless verse.

Whenever the most beautiful is perceived

ugliness arises, the least beautiful.

Whenever good is perceived

evil exists, its natural opposite.

Perception
involves opposites:

Reality and fantasy are opposing thoughts.

Difficult and simple oppose in degree.

Long and short oppose in distance.

High and low oppose in height.

Shrill and deep oppose in tone.

Before and after oppose in sequence.

The
truly wise accept this,

and they work diligently

without allegiance to words.

They teach by doing, not by saying;

are genuinely helpful, not discriminating;

are positive, not possessive.

They do not proclaim their accomplishments,

and because they do not proclaim them,

credit for them can never be taken away.

When everyone in the world became conscious of the beauty of the beautiful it turned to evil; They became conscious of the goodness of the good and ceased to be good.

Thus not-being and being arise the one from the other. So also do the difficult and the easy; the long and the short; the high and the low; sounds and voices; the preceding and the following.

Therefore the Holy Man abides by non-attachment is his affairs, and practices a doctrine which cannot be imparted by speech. He attends to everything in its turn and declines nothing; produces without claiming; acts without dwelling thereon; completes his purposes without resting in them. Inasmuch as he does this he loses nothing.

When all in the world understand beauty to be beautiful, then ugliness exists.

When all understand goodness to be good, then evil exists.

Thus existence suggests non-existence; Easy gives rise to difficult; Short is derived from long by comparison;

Low is distinguished from high by position; Resonance harmonizes sound; After follows before.

Therefore, the Sage carries on his business without action, and gives his teaching without words.

Contrast of Terms

That the social world knows to deem the beautiful as 'beautiful' simply creates
the 'ugly. '

That the social world knows to deem worth as 'worthy' simply creates 'worthlessness.
'

Thus 'exists' and 'not-exists' mutually sprout. 'Difficult' and 'easy' are mutually
done.

'Long' and 'short' are mutually gauged. 'High' and 'low' mutually incline.

'Sound' and 'tone' mutually blend. 'Before' and 'after' mutually supervene.

(Pro-sage Commentary:)

Using this: sages fix social issues without deeming ; administer a 'no words'
teaching.

The ten-thousand natural kinds work by it and don't make phrases. They sprout
but don't 'exist'. Deem-act and don't rely on anything. Accomplish their work
and don't dwell in it.

Because they don't dwell in it, they don't lose it.

When beauty is universally affirmed as beauty, therein is ugliness.

When goodness is universally affirmed as goodness, therein is evil.

Therefore: being and non-being are mutually posited in their emergence.

Difficult and easy are mutually posited in their complementariness.

Long and short are mutually posited in their positions.

High and low are mutually posited in their contradiction.

Voice and tone are mutually posited in their unity.

Front and back are mutually posited in their succession.

Thus, the wise deals with things through non-interference and teaches through no-words.

All things flourish without interruption.

They grow by themselves, and no one possesses them.

Work is done, and no one depends on it.

Achievements are made, but no one claims credit.

Because no one claims credit, achievements are always there.

The whole world can see the beautiful as the beautiful only because of the ugly.

The whole world can recognize the good as the good only because of the bad.

Something and nothing create each other.

The difficult and the easy complement each other.

The long and the short define each other.

The high and the low counterbalance each other.

Before and after follow each other.

Therefore the sage acts without action, teaches without words.

The myriad creatures keep on going without an end,

creating life without possessing it,

performing deeds without expectations,

fulfilling the mission without claiming a victory,

because the sage does not ask for praise,

therefore the praise remains with him for ever.

When all under heaven know beauty as beauty,

There is ugliness;

When all know goodness,

There is evil.

That being and nonbeing mutually generate,

Difficult and easy mutually complement,

Long and short mutually formulate,

High and low mutually fulfill,

Music and voice mutually harmonize,

Front and back mutually follow

Is constant.

Hence, the sage man

Assumed the office of nonaction,

Conducted speechless instruction.

When the ten thousand things rose,

He did not initiate.

He assisted without taking credit;

Scored merits without claiming.

Precisely because he claimed not,

They never vanished.

When the world understands that beauty is beautiful, ugliness will exist.

When the world understands that goodness is good, evil will exist.

From that we learn that:

Existence affirms non-existence,

Ease affirms difficulty,

Short derives from long, because that is what it is compared to,

Low derives from high, because according to that it is measured,

Echo affirms sound,

After follows before.

Accordingly,

The sage operates without action,

And teaches his pupils without words.

Everything in the universe, when defined, is relative to everything else.

The sage does not try to differentiate things, he does not try to show his preference for things either in deed or in speech.

This does not mean that the sage does nothing or says nothing;

rather, it means that he "accepts things as they are," easily and naturally, without making any demands.

The whole world recognizes the beautiful as the beautiful, yet this is only
the ugly;

the whole world recognizes the good as the good, yet this is only the bad.

Thus
Something and Nothing produce each other;

The difficult and the easy complement each other;

The long and the short off-set each other;

The high and the low incline towards each other;

Note and sound harmonize with each other;

Before and after follow each other.

Therefore
the sage keeps to the deed that consists in taking no action and practises the
teaching that uses no words.

The
myriad creatures rise from it yet it claims no authority;

It gives them life yet claims no possession;

It benefits them yet exacts no gratitude;

It accomplishes its task yet lays claim to no merit.

It
is because it lays claim to no merit

That its merit never deserts it.

Self-Culture

Everywhere it is obvious that if beauty makes a display of beauty, it is sheer ugliness. It is obvious that if goodness makes a display of goodness, it is sheer badness. For

"To be and not to be are mutually conditioned.

The difficult, the easy, are mutually definitioned.

The long, the short, are mutually exhibitioned.

Above, below, are mutually cognitioned.

The sound, the voice, are mutually coalitioned.

Before and after are mutually positioned."

Therefore

The holy man abides by non-assertion in his affairs and conveys by silence his instruction. When the ten thousand things arise, verily, he refuses them not. He quickens but owns not. He acts but claims not. Merit he accomplishes, but he does not dwell on it.

"Since he does not dwell on it

It will never leave him."

Beauty doesn't exist; Ugliness doesn't exist: except through the other. Good doesn't exist; bad does't exist: except through the other. Long doesn't exist; short doesn't exist: except through the other. High doesn't exist; low doesn't exist: except through the other. Before doesn't exist; after doesn't exist: except through the other. Inside doesn't exist; outside doesn't exist: except through the other. Profit doesn't exist; loss doesn't exist: except through the other. Therefore the master acts without setting a goal, and teaches that there is no teaching. Freedom from duality resides with him. Everything is his, but he has nothing. Every act is his, but he expects nothing. This is his accomplishment, which can never be destroyed.

For [people in] the world to know [only] beauty and what is beautiful is ugly;

to know [only] goodness and what is good is not good.

Ull and Null complement in generation,

difficult and easy complement in completion;

long and short complement in form,

high and low complement in norm;

voice and sound complement in harmony,

front and rear complement in company;

- they are ever so.

Thus,

a sage practices laissez-faire governance and provides wordless instructions.

[A sage] neither interferes with myriad matters' generation,

nor takes possession of [their] cultivation,

nor expects approbation of [his/her] provision,

nor seeks acclamation for [their] accomplishments.

It is because [the sage] does not seek acclamation for [his/her] accomplishments that they do not disappear.

All beneath heaven knows beauty is beauty only because there's ugliness, and knows good is good only because there's evil.

Being and nonbeing give birth to one another,

difficult and easy complete one another,

long and short measure one another,

high and low fill one another,

music and noise harmonize one another,

before and after follow one another:

that's why a sage abides in the realm of nothing's own doing,

living out that wordless teaching.

The ten thousand things arise without beginnings there,

abide without waiting there,

come to perfection without dwelling there.

Without dwelling there: that's the one way you'll never lose it.

When the world knows what beauty is, then there is ugliness;

When the world knows what good is, then there is evil.

Thus:

Being and Non-being produce each other,

Difficult and easy complement each other,

Long and short calibrate each other,

High and low contrast each other,

Music and noise harmonize each other, and

Front and back accompany each other.

Therefore the sage chooses to:

Manage affairs by taking no action;

Teach without words;

Allow all things to develop, but no to start;

Produce, but not to possess;

Care for, but not to master;

Complete work, but not to claim credit,

By not claiming credit, his credit will not be lost.

In
the world each knows how beauty acts

Where there is beauty ugliness begins

Each knows how to value

Where there is value lack of value begins.

In
this manner

Presence and absence give birth to each other

Difficult and easy complete each other

Long and short contrast each other

High and low attract each other

Tone and voice harmonize each other

Front and back follow each other.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Dwell absent of acting with effort

Do things without explaining in words

Make the 10000 things blend yet without trying to describe
them

Give birth yet without possessing

Act yet without relying on results

Are of outstanding service yet aren't willing to reside therein.

In
the end, only be unwilling to reside therein

Appropriately, a lack of detachment happens.

Everyone has the idea of beauty, and from that by opposition that of not beautiful (ugly).

All men have the idea of good, and from that by contrast that of not good (bad).

Thus, being and nothingness, difficult and easy, long and short,

high and low, sound and tone, before and after, are correlative ideas, one of which, in being known, reveals the other.

That being so, the Sage serves without acting and teaches without speaking.

He lets all beings become, without thwarting them, he lets them live, without monopolizing them, and lets them act, without exploiting them.

He does not attribute to himself the effects produced, and in consequence these effects last.

When the world knows beauty as beauty, ugliness arises

When it knows good as good, evil arises

Thus being and non-being produce each other

Difficult and easy bring about each other

Long and short reveal each other

High and low support each other

Music and voice harmonize each other

Front and back follow each other

Therefore the sages:

Manage the work of detached actions

Conduct the teaching of no words

They work with myriad things but do not control

They create but do not possess

They act but do not presume

They succeed but do not dwell on success

It is because they do not dwell on success

That it never goes away

Tao sages have long recognized the relative nature of the world. While one can certainly find absolutes in abstract theory, in the real world they rarely, if ever, exist. For instance, no metal is absolutely free of impurities. In fact, hardly anything in nature is absolutely pure. One can come close to 100% purity, but never quite get there.

It is the same with people. Absolute good and evil can exist as concepts, but will probably never be found among human beings. Everyone is a mixture of varying proportions. No person is any one thing.

If the world is by and large relative, then descriptions require comparison, perspective and proportion to have meaning. One can be "short" among NBA players and still be "tall" among kindergarten kids. Which description is correct? Both. Neither. It depends.

"Difficult" and "easy" bring about each other

"Long" and "short" reveal each other

"High" and "low" support each other

"Voice" and "music" harmonize each other

"Front" and "back" follow each other

"Hard" and "easy" are concepts relative to one another. "Long" and "short" need each other to have meaning.

The universe is full of dualities. Everything is relative; values have meaning only by comparison. For instance, a task can only be "easy" if it is being compared to some other task that is relatively more difficult. If there's nothing else to compare against, the task cannot be rated in terms of difficulty. Similarly, we can only say an object is "long" if we're comparing it against another similar object that is shorter. Each half of a duality cannot exist without the other half. A descriptive concept creates its own opposite.

When every one recognizes beauty to be only a masquerade, then it is simply ugliness. In the same way goodness, if it is not sincere, is not goodness. So existence and non-existence are incompatible. The difficult and easy are mutually opposites. Just as the long and the short, the high and the low, the loud and soft, the before and the behind, are all opposites and each reveals the other.

Therefore the wise man is not conspicuous in his affairs or given to much talking. Though troubles arise he is not irritated. He produces but does not own; he acts but claims no merit; he builds but does not dwell therein; and because he does not dwell therein he never departs.

When all under heaven know beauty (mei) as beauty,

There is then ugliness (o);

When all know the good (shan) good,

There is then the not good (pu shan).

Therefore being and non-being give rise to each other,

The difficult and easy complement each other,

The long and short shape each other,

The high and low lean on each other,

Voices and instruments harmonize with one another,

The front and rear follow upon each other.

Therefore the sage manages affairs without action,

Carries out (hsing) teaching without speech (yen).

Ten thousand things arise and he does not initiate them,

They come to be and he claims no possession (yu) of them,

He works (wei) without holding on,

Accomplishes (ch'eng) without claiming merit.

Because he does not claim merit,

His merit does not go away.

Whenever the most beautiful is perceived, ugliness arises, the least beautiful. Whenever good is perceived, evil exists, its natural opposite.

Thus, perception involves opposites; reality and fantasy are opposing thoughts; difficult and simple oppose in degree; long and short oppose in distance; high and low oppose in height; shrill and deep oppose in tone; before and after oppose in sequence.

The truly wise accept this and they work diligently without allegiance to words. They teach by doing, not by saying; are genuinely helpful, not discriminating; are positive, not possessive; do not proclaim their accomplishments, and because they do not proclaim them, credit for them can never be taken away.

No beauty without ugliness.

No good without evil.

Being and non–being are two aspects of the same reality.

Difficult and easy, long and short, high and low, before and after:

With each pair, two sides of the same coin..

Therefore, the Tao–Master acts with non–ado [wu–wei]

and teaches without speaking.

Things come and go. He lets them come and go.

He creates, but he does not own.

He achieves, but he takes no credit.

He completes his work and then forgets about it.

Practice non–ado, and your accomplishments endure.

Two

Under heaven all can see beauty as beauty only because there is ugliness.

All can know good as good only because there is evil.

Therefore having and not having arise together.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short contrast each other:

High and low rest upon each other;

Voice and sound harmonize each other;

Front and back follow one another.

Therefore
the sage goes about doing nothing, teaching no-talking.

The ten thousand things rise and fall without cease,

Creating, yet not possessing.

Working, yet not taking credit.

Work is done, then forgotten.

Therefore it lasts forever.

The whole world knows the beautiful as beautiful

Only because of the existence of the ugly;

The whole world knows the good as good

Only because of the existence of the bad.

Hence the Being and the Nothingness exist in opposition;

The difficult and the easy complement each other;

The long and the short manifest themselves by comparison;

The high and the low are inclined as well as opposed to each other;

The consonants and vowels harmonize with each other;

The front and the back follow each other.

Thus the sage behaves

Without taking active action,

Teaches without using words,

Lets all things rip without interference,

Gives them life without claiming to be their owner,

Benefits them without claiming to be their benefactor, succeeds without claiming credit.

Because he does not claim credit,

His credit is never lost.

All under Heaven recognize beautiful as beautiful,

But this is none other than ugly.

Everyone recognizes good as good,

But this is none other than bad.

Therefore being and non-being rise together;

Difficult and easy complete each other;

Long and short shape each other;

High and low lean on each other;

Sound and voice come in harmony;

Front and back accompany each other.

Therefore the sage

Relies on no-action,

Practices wordless teaching.

There rise the ten thousand things, but he disowns nothing,

He gives them life, yet does not possess them;

Rules them, yet does not depend on them;

His work is done, but he never dwells in it.

Truly, since he never dwells,

He never departs.

When everyone knows what beauty is,

There must also be ugliness.

When everybody knows what goodness is,

Then evil must also exist.

Therefore, the haves and the have-nots coexist.

Easy and hard become complementary.

Long and short differ in length.

High and low contrast in height.

Tone and pitch harmonise with each other.

The past is followed by the present.

Hence, the sage manages his affairs with non-action,

Teaches without utterance,

And lets everything develop without any interference.

Dao procreates but does not possess.

It facilitates development but does not gloat.

When it accomplishes his task, it does not claim credit.

As the sage does not claim credit for his success,

The credit cannot be taken away from him.

Self-Culture

Yang Shen

When all the world knows beauty as beauty,

Then ugliness comes into being;

When all the world knows goodness as goodness,

Then evil comes into being.

Therefore,

Being and Non-Being condition each other;

Difficult and Easy give rise to each other;

Long and Short set off each other;

High and Low contrast each other;

Tone and Voice harmonize each other;

Front and Rear succeed each other.

Thus the Sage handles affairs non-assertively,

And imparts his teaching without words.

The ten thousand things grow apace,

But he does not let them down.

He produces but does not claim ownership;

He acts but does not presume on the result;

He achieves success but does not take the credit.

For the very reason that he takes no credit,

Credit does not separate from him.

Because the world recognized beauty as beauty, ugliness is known to be ugly.

Everyone knows goodness to be goodness, and to know this is to know what is not good.

Similarily, existence implies non-existence;

The hard and the easy complement each other; We recognize what is long by comparison with what is short;

High by comparison with low;

The shrill by comparison with the sonorous.

Before and after, earlier and later, back and front -

All these complelemnt one another.

Therefore the Sage, the self-controled mand, dwells in actionless activity, poised between contraries.

He teaches without employing words.

He beholds al things that have been made - he does not turn his back on them.

He achieves, but does not claim merit;

He does not call attention to what he does, not claim success.

Regarding nothing as his own, he loses nothing that is his.

When all beneath heaven know beauty as beauty,

There is not beauty.

When all know good as good,

There is not good.

For what is and what is not beget each other;

Difficult and easy complete each other;

Long and short show each other;

High and low place each other:

Noise and sound harmonize each other;

Before and behind follow each other.

Therefore the sage

Manages without doing,

Teaches without talking.

He does not shun the ten thousand things:

Rears them without owning them,

Works for them without claiming them,

Accomplishes but takes no credit.

Because he does no take credit,

It cannot be taken from him.

As soon as the world regards something as beautiful,

ugliness simultaneously becomes apparent.

As soon as the world regards something as good,

evil simultaneously becomes apparent.

In exactly the same manner,

existence and nonexistence give birth to each other.

Difficult and easy define each other.

Long and short form each other.

High and low make each other distinguishable.

Silence and sound make each other conspicuous.

Front and back connect each other.

Realizing this, one does not separate one's being from the subtle essence of the universe.

One holds no preconceptions, and does things without insisting on personal conditions.

One guides people by living in accord with the essence of life.

One brings good things about, but has no intention of possessing them.

One performs work, but has no intention to acquire personal power.

When one's task is accomplished,

one lets go of it and seeks no reward or recognition.

Because one does not claim credit for oneself,

one does not do any damage to oneself.

II.

Nourishing
the Person

When
beauty is known as beautiful, lo! ugliness is there,

When
good is known as good, then bad and good together go,

Being
and Non-existence, linked like brothers forward press,

And
difficult and easy, both in mutual currents flow.

The
long and short are side by side, each by the other shown,

The
high inclines to meet the low, the low to meet the high,

The
after follows the before, in mutual consequence,

And
tone and voice unite and blend in mutual harmony.

And
so the sage, in his affairs, does not on doing dwell,

Proceeds
in silence like the myriad things which come to be,

Which
growing, claim no ownership, producing, no reward,

And
claiming naught, assuming naught, continue ceaselessly.

All men know the existence of beauty,

Beauty, cleft asunder, is ugliness.

All men know the existence of Love.

Love, cleft asunder, is hatred.

Therefore "possessions" and "Inner Life" interdepend in life.

Difficult and easy interdepend in completeness.

Long and short interdepend in form.

High and low interdepend in alternation.

Tone and voice interdepend in harmony.

Before and after interdepend in sequence.

That is why the self-controlled man

makes it his business to dwell in the Inner Life;

he teaches not by words, but by actions;

he brings all beings into action, he does not refuse them;

he gives them life, but does not possess them;

he acts, but does not look for reward;

he works out perfectness, but claims no credit.

The Master, indeed, rests not on rewards.

That is why he passes not away.

When
all the world recognizes beauty as beauty,

this
in itself is ugliness,

(for
it lacks a seeing of the Truth.)

(When
all of humankind abstracts beauty there is no beauty).

When
all the world recognizes good as good, this in itself is

destruction.,

(for
it lacks a seeing of the Truth.)

(What
is good in one circumstance is bad in another).

Indeed,
the hidden and the visible give birth to each other.

Hard
and easy balance each other.

Long
and short give measure to each other.

High
and low set measure to each other.

Voice
and sound give wholeness each other.

Back
and front follow each other.

Therefore,
the Complete Thinker

experiences
without abstraction

and
accomplishes without visible action;

Yet
spreads their teaching by actions.

Accepting
the ebb and flow of

the
many living things.

Raises
them,

but
makes no claim of them.

Does
his work,

but
does not brag about it.

Finishing
tasks,

and
moves on.

And
yet it is just because

of
moving on.

That
nobody can take

works
away.

Everybody in the world recognizes beauty as beauty, and thus ugliness (is known).

Everybody recognizes the good as good, and thus what is not good (is known).

For indeed:.

Being and Non-being produce one another,.

Hard and easy complete one another,.

Long and short are relative to one another,.

High and low depend on one another,.

Tone and voice harmonize with one another,.

First and last succeed one another.

All in the world know the beauty of the beautiful, and in doing

this they have (the idea of) what ugliness is; they all know the skill

of the skilful, and in doing this they have (the idea of) what the

want of skill is.

So
it is that existence and non-existence give birth the one to

(the idea of) the other; that difficulty and ease produce the one (the

idea of) the other; that length and shortness fashion out the one the

figure of the other; that (the ideas of) height and lowness arise from

the contrast of the one with the other; that the musical notes and

tones become harmonious through the relation of one with another; and

that being before and behind give the idea of one following another.

Therefore
the sage manages affairs without doing anything, and

conveys his instructions without the use of speech.

All
things spring up, and there is not one which declines to show

itself; they grow, and there is no claim made for their ownership;

they go through their processes, and there is no expectation (of a

reward for the results). The work is accomplished, and there is no

resting in it (as an achievement).

The
work is done, but how no one can see;

'Tis this that makes the power not cease to be.

The recognition of an 'ideal' of Beauty
requires 'Ugliness' to compare
it with.
The 'ideal' of Goodness require 'Badness' to compare it to.

Bodily
Life and Bodiless Life give birth to each other.
Difficult and Easy give
birth to each other, in turn.
Long and Short; High and Low; Tone
and Voice; Front and Back;
each give occasion for the other.
It must always be so.
Therefore;
the Sage does nothing much very personal,
and carries on a Discourse beyond
personalities:
one allows the myriads of things to arise, but does not demand
of them.
One acts, but not very 'personally;' one does one's work,

but without self-importance.
Simply
because one 'Mothers' things instead of 'commanding' them,
one's offspring
never leave you.

Where
beautiful and ugly

Do not stand in opposition

Where life and death or yes and no

Do not make a contradiction

Can
you see the vacant place

Where good and bad and sad and merry

Disappear forevermore?

Where nothing ever is contrary

So
stay within the emptiness

Unless you rise you never fall

Accepting that which comes your way

You are forever all in all

WHEN all the world recognises beauty as beauty, this in itself is ugliness.

When all the world recognises good as good, this in itself is evil.

Indeed, the hidden and the manifest give birth to each other.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short exhibit each other.

High and low set measure to each other.

Voice and sound harmonize each other.

Back and front follow each other.

Therefore, the Sage manages his affairs without ado,

And spreads his teaching without talking.

He denies nothing to the teeming things.

He rears them, but lays no claim to them.

He does his work, but sets no store by it.

He accomplishes his task, but does not dwell upon it.

And yet it is just because he does not dwell on it

That nobody can ever take it away from him.

It is the world of man that defines ugly by comparing it with that which man calls beautiful.

Skillful is considered such by comparison to that which is called 'without skill'.

Alive and non-alive are delineated by nature.

Difficult and easy are abstracted by our perception.

Long and short are defined by the one against the other.

High and low are reckoned so by the contrast of the one with the other.

Music is seen as pleasing if the notes and tones are recognized as being harmonious with each other.

One in front, and one behind are recognized as one following the other.

It is for this reason that the sage lives in the condition of wu-wei (unattached action, or; doing-not doing),

And teaches without words.

He knows that names and images are fleeting, and all things will transform.

One who seems to follow tonight might lead another time.

He sees all that is done as neither large nor small.

All things are neither grand nor miniscule.

Actions are neither difficult, nor done with ease. He acts without expectation.

Things spring up around him, and he accepts them, but does not possess them.

Things go away, and he recognizes their departure without grief or joy.

When the work is done he leaves it be.

Because he does not dwell in it, it will last.

When people see things as beautiful,

ugliness is created.

When people see things as good,

evil is created.

Being
and non-being produce each other.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short define each other.

High and low oppose each other.

Fore and aft follow each other.

Therefore
the Master

can act without doing anything

and teach without saying a word.

Things come her way and she does not stop them;

things leave and she lets them go.

She has without possessing,

and acts without any expectations.

When her work is done, she takes no credit.

That is why it will last forever.

All behaviour consists of opposites or polarities. If I do anything more and more, over and over, its polarity will appear. For example, striving to be beautiful makes a person ugly, and trying too hard to be kind is a form of selfishness.

Any over-determined behaviour produces its opposite:

- An obsession with living suggests worry about dying.

- True simplicity is not easy.

- Is it a long time or a short time since we last met?

- The braggart probably feels small and insecure.

- Who would be first ends up last.

Knowing how polarities work, the wise leader does not push to make things happen, but allows process to unfold on its own.

The leader teaches by example rather than by lecturing others on how they ought to be.

The leader knows that constant interventions will block the group's process. The leader does not insist that things come out a certain way.

The wise leader does not seek a lot of money or a lot of praise. Nevertheless, there is plenty of both.

When people see beauty as beautiful,

They recognize other things as ugly.

When people see goodness as good,

They recognize other things as being bad.

Therefore existence and non-existence produce one another

Difficult and easy achieve each other

Long and short define each other

High and low rely on each other

Voice and accompaniment harmonize with one another

Front and back follow each other.

Therefore, the Sage acts without "doing"

And teaches without words.

All things arise and she does not refuse them.

She creates, but does not possess

Accomplishes, but takes no credit

When finished, she doesn't dwel on it.

Because she does not dwel on it, it is always present.

Only
when one distinguishes beauty

does one create the unattractive.

Only when one distinguishes good

does one create evil.

Also
by distinction,

Tangible and intangible create each other,

Difficult and easy define each other,

Long and short measure each other,

High and low determine each other,

Sound and silence echo each other,

Beginning and end follow each other.

Therefore,
the sage goes about living in the

oneness of

all things,

teaching without speaking,

accepting and dismissing all things with

indifference,

creating without attachment,

working without credit.

Acts and deeds are completed and forgotten.

Because
the sage is at one with Infinity,

she is immortal.

Everyone under Heaven knows Beautiful;

this defines Beautiful as well as Ugly.

Everyone knows Good;

this defines Good as well as Bad.

Thus, Being and non-Being co-exist with each other,

Difficult and Easy complement each other,

Long and Short oppose each other,

High and Low merge with each other,

Sound and Noise blend with each other,

Front and Back relate to each other.

This is how the wise man can do without doing,

and teach without speaking.

All things are done without words.

Create and do not possess.

Govern and do not exploit.

Achieve the results and depart.

Depart to be remembered.

When all beneath Heaven1 know beauty as beauty

There is ugliness.

When all know good as good

There is evil.

Thus being and non-being arise together;

Easy and difficult rely upon each other;

Long and short are dependent upon each other;

High and low contrast with each other;

Music and voice harmonise together.

Before and after follow each other.

Therefore the Sage acts by doing nothing and teaches without speaking.

The Ten Thousand Things arise, but he doesn't cause them to come.

They come into being, yet he claims no possession over them.

He works for their benefit, yet requires no gratitude.

He accomplishes his tasks, yet claims no merit.

Because he claims no merit, his merit does not leave him.

1. 'Beneath Heaven' refers to the phenomenal world of everyday experience.

We know beauty because there is ugliness.

We know goodness because there are evils.

Therefore, being and non-being are relative to each other

As are what is difficult and what is easy;

What is long and what is short;

What is high and what is low;

What sounds and what resonates;

And what precedes and what follows.

The wise do good by doing nothing

And teach well by teaching nothing.

Things work without intruding on the natural process,

Develop and produce without desiring willfully,

And are successful without feeling success.

Only those who possess nothing

Will lose nothing.

When everyone in the world recognizes the elegant as elegant ... then ugliness has just appeared.

When all recognize goodness as good ... then the not-good has just appeared.

Yes: 'Being' and 'nothing' give birth one to the other 'the difficult' and 'the easy' give full shape to one another 'what excels' and 'what falls short' form one another

'the noble' and 'the lowly' give content to one another the music and the voice harmonize with one another the back and the front follow one another. Always.

And so the Wise Person: Settles into his job of Not Doing carries on his teaching done without talking.

The thousands of things arise and are active - and he rejects none of them.

He is a doer but does not rely on this he achieves successes but does not dwell in them. He just does not dwell in them, and so they cannot be taken away.

When people know what is beautiful, they understand also what is ugly.

When they learn what is good, they realize also what is evil.

In this way, beingness and non-beingness, hard and easy, long and short, high and low allow knowing each other.

Different sounds mix and create harmony. And so the preceding and the succeeding follow each other harmoniously.

The wise prefers non-doing* and lives in quietness**. Everything happens around such a person as if by itself. He is not attached to anything on the Earth. He does not own anything made by him. He is not proud about his works.

Since he does not exalt himself, does not boast, does not require special respect from others — he is pleasant to all.

* Calm of mind and body including stopping of the flow of thoughts. It allows mastering the art of meditation and developing oneself as a consciousness. (Those who are not used to the word non-doing, can mentally replace it with the word mediation, when reading this text).

** Here the author means inner quietness, which is called hesychia in Greek. The ancient direction of the Christian mysticism Hesychasm is named after it (see the book Practice of the Modern Hesychasm by Vladimir Antonov).

The beautiful is known as beautiful,

Because we know what ugly is.

The good is known as good,

Because we know what bad is.

Every
aspect has its counterpart.

What is heavy resides on what is light.

Long and short opposes each other.

Toll and short support each other.

A voice is made up of sounds.

What begins has to have an end eventually.

The
wise one will lives by non-interfering,

Thus he instructs other by example not by words.

Things
in the world continuously change.

The wise one doesn't cling on anything.

For him all are seen with the same potentiality.

He acquires merits but is not attached to them.

His takes things the way they are.

In performing he is above the actions.

Thus his merits are always with him.

Everyone
in the world knows the beautiful to be beautiful. Thus there is ugliness. They
all know good to be good. Thus there is evil. For being and non-being are mutually
produced. Difficult and easy are mutually complemented. Long and short are mutually
formed. High and low are mutually opposed. Music and voice mutually harmonize.
Fore and aft follow each other. For this reason, the Sage concerns himself only
with affairs that involve no active doing, and carries forth a wordless teaching.
The myriad creatures arise and he does not deny any of them. They are produced,
yet he does not seek to possess them. He acts and yet does not claim compensation
for so doing. When he brings meritorious work to completion he takes no credit
for it. For only by not taking credit for these accomplishments are the fruits
of his activities kept safe.

When all in the world recognize beauty as beauty, it is ugliness.

When they recognize good as good, it is not good.

Therefore,

being and non-being beget each other,

hard and easy complement each other,

long and short shape each other,

high and low rely on each other,

sound and voice harmonize with each other,

front and back follow each other.

Therefore, the Sage administers without action and instructs without words.

He lets all things rise without dominating them,

produces without attempting to possess,

acts without asserting,

achieves without taking credit.

And because he does not take credit, it will never leave him.

Using Polarity

When all the world knows beauty as beauty,

There is ugliness.

When they know good as good,

Then there is evil.

In this way

Existence and nonexistence produce each other.

Difficult and easy complete each other.

Long and short contrast each other.

Pitch and tone harmonize each other.

Future and past follow each other.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals

Hold their position without effort,

Practice their philosophy without words,

Are a part of All Things and overlook nothing.

They produce but do not possess,

Act wihtout expectation,

Succeed wtihout taking credit.

Since, indeed, they take no credit, it remains with them.

Walk through a garden. Do you see beautiful flowers? If they are beautiful to the eye and nose, then you must also label what is ugly. Describe a neighbor as a good person and another person becomes bad. Loud and quiet. Soft and hard. Before and after. The existence of each creates the other. Teach without word. Study and then forget. Let the tide ebb and flow.

Since the world points up beauty as such,

There is ugliness too.

If goodness is taken as goodness,

Wickedness enters as well.

For
is and is-not come together;

Hard and easy are complementary;

Long and short are relative;

High and low are comparative;

Pitch and sound make harmony;

Before and after are a sequence.

Indeed
the Wise Man's office

Is to work by being still;

He teaches not by speech

But by accomplishment;

He does for everything,

Neglecting none;

Their life he gives to all,

Possessing none;

And what he brings to pass

Depends on no one else.

As he succeeds,

He takes no credit

And just because he does not take it,

Credit never leaves him.

When all the people in the world know the beautiful as beauty,

There appears ugliness;

When they know goodness as good,

There appears evil.

Therefore, by opposing each other,

Existence and non-existence come into being,

Difficult and easy form themselves,

Long and short are distinct,

High and low contrast,

Sound and voice harmonize,

Front and back emerge.

Thus, the sage manages affairs by "nonaction,"

And teaches by "saying nothing."

He leaves all things to grow and change without initiation;

Raises all things without making claim for his ownership;

Promotes all things without attributing them to his contribution;

And takes no credit for himself when the work is done.

It is because no claim is made that his credit cannot be forfeited.

Once all under Heaven knew beauty as "beauty"; at that moment "ugliness" was already there.

Once all knew goodness as "goodness"; at that moment "not good" was already there.

Thus it is that presence and absence generate each other;

difficulty and ease determine the sense of the other;

long and short give proportion to the other;

highs and lows are a matter of relative inclination;

instrumental sounds and voice tones depend on one other for harmony;

and before and after result from their relative places in a sequence.

Therefore, the sage [sheng] tends to matters without conscious effort

And practices the teaching that is not expressed in words.

The myriad folk model their behavior on him, yet he does not tell them to do so.

He gives them life, yet he possesses them not.

He acts, yet they do not depend on him.

And he achieves success yet takes no pride in it.

It is just because he is not proprietary that he does not lose it.

1. When everyone in the world knows the beautiful as beautiful, ugliness comes
into being;

2. When everyone knows the good, then the not good comes to be.

3. The mutual production of being and nonbeing,

4. The mutual completion of difficult and easy,

5. The mutual formation of long and short,

6. The mutual filling of high and low,

7. The mutual harmony of tone and voice,

8. The mutual following of front and back—

9. These are all constants.

10.
Therefore the Sage dwells in nonactive affairs and practices the wordless teaching.

11. The ten thousand things arise, but he doesn't begin them;

12. He acts on their behalf, but he doesn't make them dependent;

13. He accomplishes his tasks, but he doesn't dwell on them;

14. It is only because he doesn't dwell on them, that they therefore do not
leave them.

If something
is beautiful, something else must be ugly.

If something is good, something else must be bad.

You can't have
something without nothing.

If no task is difficult,

then no task is easy.

Things are up high

because other things are down low.

You know when you're listening to music

because you don't hear noise.

And something else came first, so this must be next.

The Masters
get the job done without moving a muscle

and signify without saying a word.

When things around them fall apart, they stay cool.

They don't own much,

but they use whatever's at hand.

They do the work without expecting any favors.

When the job is finished,

they move on to the next job.

That's why their work is so damn good.

.

Relativity and Not Interfering

When the people of the world all know beauty as beauty,

there arises the recognition of ugliness.

When they all know the good as good,

there arises the recognition of bad.

Therefore being and non-being produce each other;

difficult and easy complete each other;

long and short contrast each other;

high and low distinguish each other;

sound and voice harmonize with each other;

beginning and end follow each other.

Therefore the wise manage affairs without interfering

and teach beyond the words.

All things rise, and they do not turn away from them.

They give them life, but do not take possession of them.

They act, but do not rely on their own ability.

They accomplish, but claim no credit.

Because they claim no credit,

their accomplishment remains with them.

The whole world knows: when beauty tries to be beautiful it changes into ugliness by that very fact.

The whole world knows: when kindness tries to appear kind it changes into unkindness by that very fact.

So close are Being and Non-Being that one arises from the other.

So suddenly easy becomes difficult short becomes long high becomes low loud becomes soundless the first becomes the last.

That is why the Sage strives to act without action to teach without speaking.

He lets things happen and does not try to stay them.

He labors and is not greedy.

He acts and does not demand anything.

He receives and does not retain anything.

The Rise Of Relative Opposites

Lao Tze says,

When the people in the world gain a knowledge of that which is beautiful,

they will also gain a knowledge of that which is ugly.

When they gain a knowledge of that which belongs to the realm of the good,

they will also gain a knowledge of that which belongs to the realm of the bad.

Existence and non-existence shall rotate to take place;

difficulty and ease impress people by the prepossession;

length long and short are acknowledged in comparison;

tallness and lowness confront to make contrast;

harmonious musical pieces, the notes and tones interdepend;

that which is before or behind leads or follows the other.

Therefore, there is a sage who likes to do business without the intent to control fate and conveys his instruction without speech.

All things make an effort to prosper, and there is no one who comes to interfere with them.

Moreover, the one who gives life to all things does not claim ownership of them;

works laboriously for them, and does not expect a reward in return;

establishes the feat for them, and does not confess the achievement.

Because it does not confess the achievement, no one can forget the achievement.

LETTING GO OF COMPARISONS

We
cannot know the Tao itself,

nor see its qualities direct,

but only see by differentiation,

that which it manifests.

Thus,
that which is seen as beautiful

is beautiful compared with that

which is seen as lacking beauty;

an action considered skilled

is so considered in comparison

with another, which seems unskilled.

That
which a person knows he has

is known to him by that which he does not have,

and that which he considers difficult

seems so because of that which he can do with ease.

One thing seems long by comparison with that

which is, comparatively, short.

One thing is high because another thing is low;

only when sound ceases is quietness known,

and that which leads

is seen to lead only by being followed.

In comparison, the sage,

in harmony with the Tao,

needs no comparisons,

and when he makes them, knows

that comparisons are judgements,

and just as relative to he who makes them,

and to the situation,

as they are to that on which

the judgement has been made.

Through
his experience,

the sage becomes aware that all things change,

and that he who seems to lead,

might also, in another situation, follow.

So he does nothing; he neither leads nor follows.

That which he does is neither big nor small;

without intent, it is neither difficult,

nor done with ease.

His task completed, he then lets go of it;

seeking no credit, he cannot be discredited.

Thus, his teaching lasts for ever,

and he is held in high esteem.

When people see some things as beautiful,

other things become ugly.

When people see some things as good,

other things become bad.

Being and non-being create each other.

Difficult and easy support each other.

Long and short define each other.

High and low depend on each other.

Before and after follow each other.

Therefore the Master

acts without doing anything

and teaches without saying anything.

Things arise and she lets them come;

things disappear and she lets them go.

She has but doesn't possess,

acts but doesn't expect.

When her work is done, she forgets it.

That is why it lasts forever.

When the whole world recognizes that beauty is beautiful,

It may be not beautiful at all.

When the whole world recognizes that goodness is good,

It may not be good at all.

Thus, existence and nonexistence produce each other.

The high and the low are compared with each other.

The long and the short show off each other.

The high and the low compliment each other.

The front and the rear follow each other.

Thus the Sage ruler administered state affairs by non-interference and carried out education by non-preaching.

All things are resolved in order and nothing is rejected.

It produces All Things but it does not possess them.

It provides everything for them but it does not take anything from them.

He accomplished deeds for them, but he did not claim the deeds.

Since he did not claim the deeds, they did not leave him.

In the world,

Everyone recognizes beauty as beauty,

Since the ugly is also there.

Everyone recognizes goodness as goodness,

Since evil is also there.

Since being and nonbeing give birth to each other,

Difficulty and ease complete each other,

Long and short measure each other,

High and low overflow into each other,

Voice and sound harmonize with each other,

And before and after follow each other,

Therefore the sage

Lives in actionless engagement,

And preaches wordless doctrine.

The myriad creatures

Act without beginning,

Nourish without possessing,

Accomplish without claiming credit.

It is accomplishment without claiming credit that makes the outcome self-sustaining.

II

Recognize
beauty in the world and other things become ugly

Recognize goodness and other things become evil

Is
and isn't create each other

Difficult and easy complete each other

Long and short form each other

High and low fill each other

Tone and word define each other

Front and back follow each other

All this is inescapable

Therefore
the taoist acts without a plan, teaches without a text

She creates, but doesn't define

Nurtures, but doesn't lay claim

Accomplishes, but walks away

Because
he walks away, what he does, lasts

Everyone Knows

When everyone knows beauty is beauty,

this is bad.

When everyone knows good is good,

this is not good.

So being and nonbeing produce each other:

difficulty and ease complement each other,

long and short shape each other,

high and low contrast with each other,

voice and echoes conform to each other,

before and after go along with each other.

So sages manage effortless service

and carry out unspoken guidance.

All beings work, without exception:

if they live without possessiveness,

act without presumption,

and do not dwell on success,

then by this very nondwelling

success will not leave.

People know what beauty is, because there is ugliness;

people know what good is, because there is bad.

Likewise, empty and full, difficulty and ease, long and short, high and low, sound and tone, front and rear, all go side by side.

Thus,

the sage handles affairs without the intention for fame, and teaches without preaching,

lets things develop without initialize them,

lets things grow without interfering them,

lets things move ahead without forcing them,

lets things succeed without boast about them.

Because the sage does not brag his success, he would continue to be successful.

When the entire world recognizes beauty as beauty, there is ugliness.

When the entire world recognizes good as good, there is evil.

Indeed, "nothing" and "being" give birth to each other.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short exhibit each other.

High and low set measure to each other.

Voice and sound harmonize each other.

Back and front follow each other.

Therefore, the sage manages his affairs by "non-doing", and spreads his teaching by "non-talking".

The Way makes all things and denies nothing; it gives birth to them, but lays no claim to them; it does its work, but does not say by its work; it accomplishes his work, but does not dwell on things.

And yet it is just because he does not dwell on things that nobody can ever take them away from it.

Everyone loves beauty, because there is ugliness.

Everyone loves goodness, because there is evil.

Existence, non-existence beget each other.

Difficult and easy complement each other.

Long and short contrast each other.

High and low rest upon each other.

Voice and sound harmonize each other.

Front and back follow each other.

Therefore, sages doing without effort, teaching without words.

Everything rise and fall without end.

Creating, yet not possessing,

Working, yet not taking credit.

Successful, gives credits to others and moves on;

Thus, receives respect forever more.

All under heaven see beauty as beauty

only because they also see ugliness.

All announce that good is good

only because they also denounce what is bad.

Therefore,
something and nothing give birth to one another

Difficult and easy complete one another.

Long and short fashion one another.

High and low arise from one another.

Notes and tones harmonize with one another.

Front and back follow one another.

Thus,
the True Person acts without striving

and teaches without words.

Deny
nothing to the ten thousand things.

Nourish
them without claiming authority,

Benefit them without demanding gratitude,

Do the work, then move on.

And,
the fruits of your labor will last forever.

Everyone
knows what god is --

that is how we know what is not god.

Everyone knows what good is --

that is how we know what is not good.

This
is how being and not-being,

experience and non-experience,

theism and atheism

create each other

and are mutually dependent.

Light and dark complement each other,

long and short form one another,

low and high are relative,

sound and tone are harmonies.

Wise
persons

do not judge good or bad

do not take action for or against

do not disown judgment or action

but practice a silent teaching.

Only together do opposites make a whole.

The
world is acted upon by even the passive observer,

still nothing is taken and nothing is destroyed.

Things are created, actions taken,

but no claim is made upon them.

Things are controlled but not manipulated for personal gain.

Compensation -- verbal or material -- is never the desired goal.

When the people of the world see beauty as beauty,

the notion of ugliness pops up along with that

And equally if every one recognize virtue as virtue, if they all know the good
as good, the recognition of adjacent evil is wont to rise.

So:
Being and not-yet-being interdepend in growth; grow out of another, they can
produce each other.

And hard and easy interdepend in completion;

long and short interdepend. They test each other in contrast.

High and low determine one another and interdepend or distinguish each other
in position. So it seems.

Pitch and mode give harmony to one another; tones, sound and voice interdepend
in basic, functional harmony;

Front and back give sequence to one another.

The couples follow each other - interdepend in company, so to speak.

From
this the wise man relies on doing nothing in the open, it's wu-wei. And he spreads
doctrines without true or false words, by oddly wordless influence.

All things appear, and he hardly turns away from the creatures worked on by
him:

Some he gives solid, good life, he hardly disowns his chosen ones.

He hardly takes possession of anyone under fair conditions.

He rears his sons in earthly ways, but neither appropriates nor lays blatant
claim to any one.

He acts, but doesn't rely on his outer, visible smartness or miracle-working
ability. He very often claims no credit.

At times he controls them, but hardly leans on any of them.

Because he lays claim to no credit, the handy credit can hardly be taken away
from him.

Yes, for the very reason that he hardly calls attention to what he does, he
isn't ejected at once.

When all under heaven know beauty as beauty, already there is ugliness;

When everyone knows goodness, this accounts for badness.

Being and nonbeing give birth to each other,

Difficult and easy complete each other,

Long and short form each other,

High and low fulfill each other,

Tone and voice harmonize with each other,

Front and back follow each other - it is ever thus.

For these reasons,

The sage dwells in affairs of nonaction, carries out a doctrine without words.

He lets the myriad creatures rise up but does not instigate them;

He acts but does not presume;

He completes his work but does not dwell on it.

Now,

Simply because he does not dwell on them, his accomplishments never leave him.

When the world speaks of beauty as being beautiful, ugliness is at once defined.

When goodness is seen to be good, evil is at once apparent.

So do existence and non-existence mutually give rise to one another, as that which is difficult and that which is easy, distant and near, high and low, shrill and bass, preceding and following.

The Sage therefore is occupied only with that which is without prejudice.

He teaches without verbosity; he acts without effort; he produces with possessing, he acts without regard to the fruit of action; he brings his work to perfection without assuming credit; and claiming nothing as his own, he cannot at any time be said to lose.

The Heaven of the Moment

Always thinking of what you like

and what you don't like

exhausts the energy that could be used

to fuel your passion.

Events of life are always changing.

Everything is made new in your life

between the time you read this line . . .

and this one.

Difficult times and joyous times

can follow each other as swiftly.

When good times arrive welcome them.

When they seem to pass, let them go.

When pain arrives do not despair.

It will pass as well.

You will sometimes feel strong and whole,

and sometimes weak and partial.

This is not a problem.

Do not let these things distract you.

When this evening comes,

lie down in each other's arms.

Let the day slip away.

And enjoy the heaven of the moment.

When all the people of the world know beauty as beauty, There arises the recognition of ugliness.

When they all know the good as good, There arises the recognition of evil.

Therefore: Being and non-being produce each other; Difficult and easy
complete each other; Long and short contrast each other;

High and low distinguish each other; Sound and voice harmonize each other; Front and behind accompany each other.

Therefore the sage manages affairs without action And spreads doctrines without words.

All things arise, and he does not turn away from them. He produces them but does not take possession of them.

He acts but does not rely on his own ability. He accomplishes his task
but does not claim credit for it. It is precisely because he does not
claim credit that his accomplishment remains with him.

People through
finding something beautiful

Think something else unbeautiful,

Through finding one man fit

Judge another unfit.

Life and death, though stemming from each other, seem to conflict as stages
of change,

Difficult and easy as phases of achievement,

Long and short as measures of contrast,

High and low as degrees of relation;

But, since the varying of tones gives music to a voice

And what is the was of what shall be,

The sanest man

Sets up no deed,

Lays down no law,

Takes everything that happens as it comes,

As something to animate, not to appropriate,

To earn, not to own,

To accept naturally without self-importance:

If you never assume importance

You never lose it.

Everyone knows that beauty is good, but ugliness exists as well.

Everyone knows that kindness is good, but unkindness exists as well.

Therefore, nothingness and existence always coexist;

As do difficulty and easiness, long and short, high and low, and sound and hearing.

For this reason, the great men practiced WUWEI.

They wordlessly taught people and let the world develop by itself.

Create but do not control, nurture but do not own, accomplish but do not claim.

Only when you do not claim the accomplishment, will it never leave.

When the world recognizes beauty as beauty, ugliness arises.

When the world recognizes good as good, evil arises.

Being and non-being create each other.

Difficult and easy define each other.

Long and short form each other.

High and low support each other.

Tone and voice accompany each other.

Before and after follow each other.

Hence,

the sage lives in the state of non-action - of eternal balance,

And teaches by the precept of silence - and through his silent deed.

He accepts things as they arise,

Creates without possessing,

Performs without depending,

Accomplishes without claiming credit.

Because he does not claim credit for himself,

His virtues endure forever more.

We know beauty because there is ugliness.

We know goodness because there are evils.

Therefore, being and non-being are relative to each other

As are what is difficult and what is easy;

What is long and what is short;

What is high and what is low;

What sounds and what resonates;

And what precedes and what follows.

The wise do good by doing nothing

And teach well by teaching nothing.

Things work without intruding on the natural process,

Develop and produce without desiring willfully,

And are successful without feeling success.

Only those who possess nothing

Will lose nothing.

It is the world of man that defines ugly by comparing it with that which man calls beautiful.

Skillful is considered such by comparison to that which is called 'without skill'.

Alive and non-alive are delineated by nature.

Difficult and easy are abstracted by our perception.

Long and short are defined by the one against the other.

High and low are reckoned so by the contrast of the one with the other.

Music is seen as pleasing if the notes and tones are recognized as being harmonious with each other.

One in front, and one behind are recognized as one following the other.

It is for this reason that the sage lives in the condition of wu-wei (unattached action, or; doing-not doing),

And teaches without words.

He knows that names and images are fleeting, and all things will transform.

One who seems to follow tonight might lead another time.

He sees all that is done as neither large nor small.

All things are neither grand nor miniscule.

Actions are neither difficult, nor done with ease. He acts without expectation.

Things spring up around him, and he accepts them, but does not possess them.

Things go away, and he recognizes their departure without grief or joy.

When the work is done he leaves it be.

Because he does not dwell in it, it will last.

