===== Chapter 50 =====

Produced by birth, entering into death:

The disciples of life are three out of ten.

The disciples of death are three out of ten.

The lives of people

That move them toward a death on the earth:

[Of these] are there also three out of ten.

Why?

Because of their living the thickness of life.

But hear of those [one in ten] who are good at negotiating life:

Traveling by land, they do not encounter the cruel or the fierce.

Entering into an army, they are not covered with armor or weapons.

The cruel have no place to thrust their spear-tips

The fierce have no place to use their claws

Soldiers find no place to receive their blades.

Why?

Because of their having no death on the earth.

Emerge into life, enter death,

Life is only the thirteen body parts. Death is only the thirteen body
parts. Human life, moving towards death, Is the same thirteen. Why is
this? Because life gives life to substance.

You have heard of people Good at holding on to life. Walking overland
they don't avoid Rhinos and tigers. In battle they don't arm themselves.

The rhino's horn find nothing to gore; The tiger's claws find nothing to
flay, Weapons find nothing to pierce. Why is this? They have no mortal
spot.

Seeking life we find death.

There are thirteen passageways of life.

There are thirteen passageways of death.

People take those thirteen passageways of death

And their lives proceed toward death.

Why? People care too much about life.

It has been said:

Those who are good at staying alive

Meet no buffaloes or tigers in the wilderness,

They've no use for armor and weapons on the battleground.

A buffalo can find no place to mark in them.

A tiger can find no place to claw.

A weapon can find no place to cut.

Why? There is no place for death in them.

COMPANIONS OF LIFE AND DEATH

Aiming at life, death is achieved.

The limbs and apertures, forming thirteen companions during life,

The same thirteen, serve also as companions of death.

These thirteen companions of the life to death transition,

Serve as points of vulnerability -

Repaying the intense overtaxing of one's life force.

The Sage:

When walking about does not meet threats of danger.

In battle, is untouched by the warrior's weapons.

Not aiming at life -

Has no points of vulnerability,

- For the horns of the buffalo to pierce.

- For the claws of the tiger to tear.

- For the weapons of the warrior to enter.

He is beyond mortality.

The Source gives life and penetrates death.*

Life is a companion to the four directions that exist within Heaven, Humanity and Earth.

Death is a companion to the four directions that exist within Heaven, Humanity and Earth.

People are born, live, and die, on earth, also as companions to the four directions that exist within Heaven, Humanity and Earth.

What is the purpose?

To give life.

To give life abundantly.

Indeed, we have heard of people who are good at sustaining life.

On land they travel and do not encounter rhinoceroses.

Tigers enter the battlefield and they do not need to wear armor or carry weapons.

Rhinoceroses have no place to butt with their horns.

Tigers have no place to put their claws.

Soldiers have no place to thrust their blades.

How can this be so?

Because of the not-dying** Earth.

* The life force energy from the Source penetrates what is dead and brings it more alive.

** Not-dying means the absence of death, as not-doing means the absence of doing.

THE ESTIMATION OF LIFE

Man cometh into life, and returneth again into death.

Three
men in ten conserve life; three men in ten pursue death.

Three
men also in ten desire to live, but their acts hasten their journey

to the house of death. Why is this? Because of their efforts to

preserve life.

But
this I have heard. He that is wise in the economy of his life,

whereof he is warden for a season, journeyeth with no need to avoid the

tiger or the rhinoceros, and goeth uncorsleted among the warriors with no

fear of sword or lance. The rhinoceros findeth in him no place vulnerable

to its horn, the tiger to its claws, the weapon to its point. Why is

this? Because there is no house of death in his whole body. {56}

Men come forth and live; they enter (again) and die. Of every ten threeare ministers of life (to themselves); and three are ministers of death.there are also three in every ten whose aim is to live, but whose movementstend to the land (or place) of death. And for what reason? Because of theirexcessive endeavours to perpetuate life. But I have heard that he who isskilful in managing the life entrusted to him for a time travels on theland without having to avoid buff coat or sharp weapon. The rhinocerosfinds no place in him into which to thrust its horn, not the tiger a placein which to fix its claws, nor the weapon a place to admit its point. Andfor what reason? Because there is in him no place of death.

Humans come and go

Their bodies as the seat of life

Their bodies as the seat of death

Humans get old and decay

Why is that?

It's because they are already dead, but think that they're living

There have been stories told and written about people who had found true life

And wandered around the earth

Not afraid of tigers or rhinos

Those who avoided weapons and violence

And lived in harmony with all creatures

Therefore no creature felt threatened by them

And no weapon could harm them

Why is that?

Because they were only living

And that's where there is no room for death

It is natural for man to be born and to die. And it is natural for each of his parts to be born and to die and to evolve through its life cycle.

Why do men become so perturbed and anxious to prolong the life of each part when endangered? The truth is that whatever is natural is good.

Since it is natural for man to dies anyway, being assisted by horn or claw or spear in bringing about his death in no way endangers his nature.

No wild buffalo horn can change the course of Nature. No tiger's claw can act unnaturally. No soldier's spear can go against Nature. Why? Because death is natural, but Nature cannot die.

He who aims at life achieves death.

If the "companions of life" are thirteen,

So likewise are the "companions of death" thirteen.

How is it that the "death-stops" in man's life

And activity are also thirteen?

It is because men feed life too grossly.

It is said that he who has a true hold on life,

When he walks on land does not meet tigers or wild buffaloes;

In battle he is not touched by weapons of war.

Indeed,

A buffalo that attacked him would find nothing for its horns to butt,

A tiger would find nothing for its claws to tear,

A weapon would find no place for its point to enter in.

And why?

Because such men have no "death-spot" in them.

In the passage from womb to grave

one in three are disciples of living.

One in three are disciples of death.

One in three are just passing through.

All believe they have life.

He who knows the truth of existence

does not fear wild bulls or tigers.

He wears no armor in battle.

Bulls have no place to thrust their horns.

Tigers have no place to sink their claws.

Weapons have no place to enter.

Why is this?

Because death is for the living.

Emerging in life (or) entering death

The companions of life will be three (in) ten

The companions of death will be three (in) ten

And others whose lives & actions approach the domain of death

Will also be three (in) ten

Now why is this so?

Because these live life for its substance

Now hear of the one adept at sustaining life

Traveling the countryside, not meeting buffalo or tiger

Entering a battle, not carrying armor or weapons -

The buffalo finds no place to thrust its horns

The tiger finds no place to sink its claws

The weapon finds no place to admit its blade

Now why is this so?

Because in this one there is no place for death

Life and death

We come out into life and go back in death.

The companions of life are thirteen;

The companions of death are thirteen;

And yet people, becuse they regard life as LIFE,

In all of their actions move forard to the thirteen

that belong to the realm of death.

Now, why is this so?

Because they regard as LIFE.

You have no doubt heard of those

who are good at holding on to life:

When they walk through hills,

They do not avoid rhinoceros or tiger.

When they go to battle,

They do not put on armor or shields:

The rhinoceros has no place to probe with its horn;

The tiger has no place to put its claws;

And weapons find no place to hold their blades.

Now, why is this so?

Because there is no place for death in them.

Between their births and their deaths,

three out of ten are attached to life, three out of ten are attached to death, three out of ten are just idly passing through. Only one knows how to die and stay dead and still go on living.

That one hasn't any ambitions, hasn't any ideas, makes no plans. From this mysterious place of not-knowing and non-doing he gives birth to whatever is needed in the moment. Because he is constantly filling his being with nonbeing, he can travel the wilds without worrying about tigers or wild buffalo, or he can cross a battlefield without armour or weapon.

No tiger can claw him. No buffalo can gore him. No weapon can pierce him. Why is this so? Because he has died, there isn't any more room for death in him.

Into life they arise,

Through death they return.

A third of them seem bound up with their lives;

A third of them seem attached to death;

Another third appear ambivalent-

Passively shifting their allegiance

From each to each.

Why is this so?

Perhaps from an obsessive attachment

To life's mere appearance?

But I have heard of people

Who could live long and travel far-

Ever free of harm or mortal wound

From wild beasts or deadly weapons.

A rhinoceros would find no place to pierce them;

There would be no meat for a tiger's claws,

And no place where a sword could enter.

And why is this so?

Because they have shed the illusion

That marks off life

From the realm of death.

Life leaves and death enters.

Three
and ten parts accompany life;

three and ten parts accompany death;

three and ten parts move toward death.

(Four limbs plus nine orifices.)

Why?
The wear of the drive to live.

Why? Living tips the balance toward dying.

It
is said that whoever realizes this

is not attacked by the wild buffalo or tiger

and is not vulnerable on the field of battle.

The buffalo's horns find no place to gore,

the tiger's claws no place to tear,

the soldier's weapons no place to pierce.

Why?
Because death is not yet within reach.

Birth is an exit; death an entrance.

Three in ten are ways of life; three in ten are ways of death; three in ten also of those who live move into the realm of death. Why is this? Because of their excessive strivings after life. It has been said that he who thoroughly understands how to care for life will not need to shun the rhinoceros or the tiger; he need not fear weapons even in the midst of battle. The rhinoceros finds no place into which to thrust his horn; the tiger no place into which to fix his claws; nor the sword a place into which to flesh its point. Why is this?

Because such a one is not moved by the thought of death.

Men go out of life and enter into death.

The parts (proportions) of life are three in ten, the parts of death are also three in ten. Men that from birth move towards the region of death are also three in ten. Why is it so? Because of their redundant effort in seeking to live. But only those who do nothing for the purpose of living are better than those who prize their lives. For I have heard that he who knows well how to conserve life, when travelling on land, does not meet the rhinoceros or the tiger; when going to a battle, he is not attacked by arms and weapons. The rhinoceros can find nowhere to drive his horn; the tiger can find nowhere to put his claws; the weapons can find nowhere to thrust their blades. Why is it so? Because he is far beyond the region of death.

Fantasies of Avoiding Death

We emerge into life and enter into death.

Of life's associates, ten have three.

Of death's associates, ten have three.

People's being alive, death ground's activities

also ten have three.

Now, why is this?

Because they 'life' the thickness of life.

In general, when we hear about those worthy to abet life:

They walk the earth without encountering rhinoceros or tiger.

They enter the army and don't bear armor or weapons.

The rhinoceros has no place to thrust its horn.

The tiger has no place to wield its claws.

Arms have no place to accommodate their points.

Now, why is this?

Because they lack death's ground.

To live or to die:

Three out of ten men live,

While three out of ten men die.

Further, three out of ten men cling to life,

But they lose it.

Why?

Because they all crave life.

He who knows how to safeguard his life

Does not encounter tigers or rhinoceroses.

In the battlefield

He does not avoid dangerous weapons.

Rhinoceroses cannot gore him,

Tigers cannot claw him,

Dangerous weapons cannot harm him.

Why?

Because there is no place in him for death.

Emotions and longings are life.

Passions and desires are death.

There are thirteen kinds of life:

seven are emotions and they refer to the gates of the mind;

six are longings and they refer to the gates of the body.

There are also thirteen kinds of death:

seven are passions and they refer to the gates of the mind;

six are desires and they refer to the gates of the body.

These thirteen kinds of life and death rule also human beings, because one treasures life.

He who is good at conserving his life will not meet the rhinoceros and the tiger on his journey.

He can enter a battle without being hurt.

The rhinoceros cannot attack him with its horn,

the tiger cannot scratch him with its claws,

troops cannot use their swords against him.

That is only because he has no place for death to enter.

People emerge into life and enter into death.

The category of life constitutes three tenths;

The category of death constitutes three tenths;

And those who, seeking extravagant living,

All move to the realm of death

Also constitute three tenths.

Why so?

Because they seek extravagant living.

I hear that those who excel in preserving life,

Walking in mountains,

Shun neither rhinoceros nor tiger;

Entering a battle,

Incur wounds from neither weapon nor armor.

The rhinoceros has nowhere to thrust its horn;

The tiger has nowhere to press its claws;

Weapons have nowhere to lodge their blades.

Why so?

Because they do not belong to the realm of death.

It is easy to hold something that is motionless,

It is easy to create a mold for something that is not lacking,

It is easy to break something that is breakable,

It is easy to scatter a thing that is small.

Take care of a thing before it happens,

Arrange a thing before it gets out of hand.

The simple man generally fails in his affairs on the verge of success.

Take care of the end as you do of the beginning,

And you will not fail.

When going one way means life and going the other means death, three in ten
will be comrades in life, three in ten will be comrades in death, and there
are those who value life and as a result move into the realm of death, and these
also number three in ten.

Why is this so? Because they set too much store by life.

I have heard it said that one who excels in safeguarding his own life does not
meet with rhinoceros or tiger when travelling on land nor is he touched by weapons
when charging into an army.

There is nowhere for the rhinoceros to pitch its horn;

There is nowhere for the tiger to place its claws;

There is nowhere for the weapon to lodge its blade.

Why is this so? Because for him there is no realm of death.

The Estimation of Life

Abroad in life, home in death.

There are thirteen avenues of life; there are thirteen avenues of death; on thirteen avenues men that live pass unto the realm of death.

Now, what is the reason? It is because they live life's intensity.

Yea, I understand that one whose life is based on goodness, when traveling on land will not fall a prey to the rhinoceros or the tiger. When coming among soldiers, he need not fear arms and weapons. The rhinoceros finds no place wherein to insert its horn. The tiger finds no place wherein to put his claws. Weapons find no place wherein to thrust their blades. The reason is that he does not belong to the realm of death.

Ordinary people revolve in the misery of birth and death. The master is free from birth and death. A person is not born of existence, but born of societal conditioning. Ordinary people are like water which fears the death of freezing. The master is like H2O and welcomes the movement of one state to another as the natural course of things. Because he accepts death, he is always safe. Wild beasts or weapons cannot harm him.

People are born and people die.

Three in ten live long;

Three in ten die young;

Three in ten move [prematurely] into death's realm.

Why so?

Because they care for their lives too well.

Those who care for themselves, it is said, are unlikely to encounter rhinoceroses or tigers on land, or face weaponry and soldiers in war.

Rhinoceroses have no occasion to use their horns;

tigers have no occasion to use their claws;

soldiers have no occasion to use their bayonets.

Why so?

Because they care for themselves to not move into death's realm.

People born into life enter death.

Constant companion in life

and in death,

this body is the kill-site animating their lives.

And isn't that because

they think life is the fullness of life?

I've heard those who encompass the whole of life

could walk on and on without meeting rhinoceros or tiger,

could charge into armies without feeling shield or sword.

A rhinoceros would find nowhere to gore them,

a tiger nowhere to claw them,

a sword nowhere to slice them.

And isn't that because

for them there's no kill-site?

From birth to death,

Three out of ten follow the path of life;

Three out of ten follow the path of death; also

Three out of ten who follow the path of life may move into path of death.

Why is that? Because they over strive in their lives.

I heard that he who excels in self-preservation:

Meets no tiger or rhinoceros while walking on land;

Escapes harm while fighting in wars.

And he encounters:

No rhinoceros butting its horn against him;

No tiger exerting its claws against him;

No soldier thrusting his knife against him.

Why is this so?

Because he is not on the path of death.

Life
going out, death entering

There is living following 13

There is dying following 13.

The life of man strives toward the realm of death, also 13.

Why
is it so in the end?

It happens, it is life lived thickly.

As
a fact it is well known that those skilled in preserving life

Travel the land without running into rhinos and tigers

The militia enters and the strategy is to lack armor.

The
rhino is absent of a place to thrust its horn

The tiger is absent of a place to affix its claw

The army is absent of a place to admit its blade.

Why
is it so in the end?

It happens, they are absent of the realm of death.

Men go forth into life, And return in death.

Out of ten men, three prolong their life (through cleanliness), three hasten their death (through their excesses), three compromise their life by the attachment they have to it, (And only one stays alive until his term, because he is not attached to it).

He who is not attached to his life, does not turn aside to avoid an encounter with a rhinoceros or a tiger; he throws himself into the fray without armour or weapons;

And he comes to no harm because he is proof against the rhinoceros horn, the tiger's claws, And weapons of combat. Why is this? ... Because, exteriorized through his indifference, death cannot take a hold on him.

Coming into life, entering death

The followers of life, three in ten

The followers of death, three in ten

Those whose lives are moved toward death

Also three in ten

Why? Because they live lives of excess

I've heard of those who are good at cultivating life

Traveling on the road, they do not encounter rhinos or tigers

Entering into an army, they are not harmed by weapons

Rhinos have nowhere to thrust their horns

Tigers have nowhere to clasp their claws

Soldiers have nowhere to lodge their blades

Why? Because they have no place for death

In the process of living - from birth, when we come into this world, to death, when we depart - we observe that most people can be grouped into several categories.

Three persons out of ten can be described as followers of life. They seek to live a life of longevity and safety, so they have their focus on getting by from day to day. They lead cautious lives with little risk or challenge. Their existence tends to be uneventful, mundane and colorless.

The complete opposite to the above would be what we call the followers of death. These are the people with self-destructive tendencies. They rush headlong into any situation recklessly, throwing caution to the winds. They put their own health and safety at risk unnecessarily. We observe that there are also three persons out of ten who fit this description.

The third category consists of people who start out pursuing life, but end up pursuing death. Like the above two categories, there are roughly three persons in ten who belong to this group.

How can such people start with life but end with death? Usually, they start out wishing to live life to the fullest, so they sample all the pleasures of the material world. But it is easy to overindulge when they do so, and soon their excessive lifestyles begin to take a heavy toll on their health and peace of mind. Thus, overindulgence leads them toward death.

Nine persons out of ten fit in one of the three categories above: fearful living, dangerous living, or excessive living. The rare exception, the one-in-ten minority, is the type of person who can transcend the predictable patterns that most people fall into.

We've heard of people like this, who are good at cultivating life. They enjoy living in moderation; they do not shrink from the unfamiliar; at the same time, they are also not foolhardy. They are the skillful players - not spectators - in the game of life. They are fully engaged and fully committed in their interactions with others and the world.

Because of the way they live, they do not encounter dangerous beasts representing the hazards of daily existence as they travel the road of life. When they wade into the battlefield of social competition, they are not harmed by the many weapons wielded by soldiers, representing personal attacks.

Their impeccable conduct leaves no room for others to hurt them with vicious rumors, innuendoes or insinuations. It is as if the wild rhinocerous of underhanded, back-stabbing tactics cannot find a place to thrust its deadly horn.

They feel no need to defend their point of view, nor to convince or persuade others of the correctness of their perspective. Thus, the tigers of blame, criticism and petty bickering have no target upon which to use their lethal claws.

When destructive force comes their way, they do not attempt to counter it head-on with equal or greater force. Instead, they expend minimal energy and redirect it away from themselves. Thus, the swords of negativity are deflected and cannot touch them.

How can they deal with life with such ease? It isn't so much that they possess toughness, so that slings and arrows bounce off them and outrageous fortune cannot hurt them. Rather, theirs is the ability to transcend fear, risk, and excess in their approach to life. Their mastery of living simply leaves no room for anything that is negative or destructive.

Notes

Quite a few translations render "three in ten" as one-third. This is not correct. If that is what Lao Tzu wanted to express, he would simply say "one in three," which would rule out any possibility of confusion.

The fourth category, the rare one person out of ten, is not specifically stated, only implied. As a result, many interpretations miss it completely. Now that you have seen this translation and know what you're looking for, try comparing it with other translations and you should be able to see it more clearly than before.

ESTEEM LIFE

Life is a going forth; death is a returning home. Of ten, three are seeking life, three are seeking death, and three are dying. What is the reason? Because they live in life's experience. (Only one is immortal.)

I hear it said that the sage when he travels is never attacked by rhinoceros or tiger, and when coming among soldiers does not fear their weapons. The rhinoceros would find no place to horn him, nor the tiger a place for his claws, nor could soldiers wound him. What is the reason? Because he is invulnerable.

From coming out to life to going back to death:

Those companions (t'u) of life,

They are one-third (shih-yu-san);

Those companions of death,

They are one-third;

Those living but moving toward the place of death,

They are also one-third.

Why?

Because of the intense (hou) life-producing activity.

I have heard that one who knows how to nourish life,

On land meets no tigers or wild buffaloes,

In battle needs to wear no armors or weapons,

A wild buffalo has nowhere to butt its horns,

A tiger has nowhere to sink its claws,

A weapon has nowhere to enter its blade.

Why?

Because such a one has no place of death.

Life leaves and death enters. Three and ten parts accompany life; three and ten parts accompany death; three and ten parts move toward death. Why? The wear of the drive to live.

It is said that whoever realizes this is not attacked by the wild buffalo or tiger and is not vulnerable on the field of battle. The buffalo's horns find no place to gore; the tiger's claws no place to tear; the soldier's waepons no place to pierce. Why? Because death is not yet within reach.

--- Alternate version:

Three parts in ten accompany life; three parts in ten accompany death; three parts in ten move toward death. Why? Living tips the balance toward dying.

It is said that whoever realizes this is not attacked by the wild buffalo or tiger and is not vulnerable on the field of battle. The buffalo's horns find no place to gore; the tiger's claws no place to tear; the soldier's waepons no place to pierce. Why? Because death is not yet within reach.

Come into life, go into death.

Three out of ten have a lust for life.

Three out of ten have a lust for death.

Three out of ten just pass from birth to death

without appreciating either life or death.

Why is this?

Because none of them appreciates both life and death.

But there are those [one out of ten?]

who appreciate both life and death.

When they travel the country, they are not attacked by rhinos and tigers.

When they go into battle, they are not wounded.

The rhino finds nothing to gore.

The tiger finds nothing to claw.

Weapons find nothing to pierce.

Why? Because such people have gone beyond death.

Fifty

Between birth and death,

Three in ten are followers of life,

Three in ten are followers of death,

And men just passing from birth to death also number three in ten.

Why is this so?

Because they live their lives on the gross level.

He who knows how to live can walk abroad

Without fear of rhinoceros or tiger.

He will not be wounded in battle.

For in him rhinoceroses can find no place to thrust their horn,

Tigers no place to use their claws,

And weapons no place to pierce.

Why is this so?

Because he has no place for death to enter.

Men live when given to birth

And die when being buried.

One third of them are long-lived;

One third of them are short-lived;

One third of them die from their own choices though they could have lived longer;

Why in such cases?

Because they are too eager to live longer.

It is heard that he who is good at preserving his life

Does not meet with the rhinoceros or tiger when traveling on land,

Nor is he wounded in war,

For the rhinoceros has no use for its horns

And the tiger has no use for its claws;

The weapons have no use for their blades.

Why in such cases?

Because there is no realm of death for him to enter.

You come out to life and enter death.

The companions of life are three in ten;

The companions of death are three in ten:

The way humans live,

There are those who move into death-spots.

They too are three in ten.

Why is this so?

It is because of their hoarding of life.

I hear that those who nurture life well,

When traveling on land, do not meet wild buffaloes or tigers,

Nor do they, when going into battle, put on armor or shields.

The wild buffalo would find no place to thrust its horns;

The tiger would find no place to place its claws;

The sword would find no place to lodge its blade.

Why is this so?

Because for such men there are no death-spots.

From the time you were born, you are dying.

About one-third of people are luxuriating in longevity,

Another third are enjoying a normal life span but travelling along the path towards a natural death.

The other third are heading on the path towards a premature death.

The cause of premature death is due to overindulgence in life.

I have heard that people, who master the art of living,

Can avoid meeting a rhinoceros or tiger in the jungle.

They can avoid getting hurt by any sharp weapons in a battle.

The rhinoceros cannot employ its horn against them.

The tiger cannot attack them with its paws.

Sharp weapons cannot inflict injury on them.

Why is this so?

They simply manage to stay away from the circle of death.

Importance of Life

Kuei Sheng

As life emerges, death enters.

The agents of life are thirteen;

The agents of death are likewise thirteen;

The thirteen also may make men move in a death spot.

Why so?

Because life is lived in too intense a manner.

I have heard that -

He, who is adept in guarding his life,

Will not come across rhinoceros and tigers,

When travelling on land;

And when in the armed forces,

Will not get wounded by deadly weapons.

In him the rhinoceros can find no place to butt,

Nor can the tiger find any place to claw,

Nor can the weapons find any place to injure.

Why so?

Because there is no death spot in him.

To go out from life is to enter death.

The Knights of Life are thirteen;

The Knights of Death are thirteen.

And most men in living create thirteen vulnerable spots within themselves.

How is that?

Because they are so avid of life.

I have heard that he who has control of his life may walk throughout the land and meet neither tiger nor rhinoceros;

He may pass through a battle-field indifferent to weapons and armour.

For the rhinoceros would find in him no place to drive its horn;

The tiger would find no place to thrust its claws;

The weapon no place to insert its blade.

How is that?

Because such as he have no vulnerable spots.

Going out is life;

Coming back is death.

The companions of life are thirteen.

The companions of death are thirteen.

For people moving toward the place of death

There are also thirteen.

How is that?

Because they live intently.

It is said that

He who preserves his life

Meets no tigers or wild buffaloes on the road,

Remains untouched by weapons in the wars.

In him, the wild buffalo

Finds no space for his horns,

The tiger no space for his claws,

The soldier no space for his blade.

How is this?

Because there is no place for death in him.

That one's physical life will begin with birth and end in death seems a surety.

Also, in an individual life, the special opportunities of life and death are very much equal.

When there is an opportunity for death,

there is an opportunity for life also.

When there is an unusual opportunity for life,

it pulls one's life closer to death.

Aside from such opportunities,

there is the personal effort to maintain normalcy.

This is much more reliable than the special opportunities which place one's life on the verge of life and death.

People of awareness value normalcy and forsake seeking special opportunities which hold the promise of increasing the strength of living.

Such things are eventually only ways to speed up one's life.

One who can enjoy his natural life is content with the life of simple normalcy.

As I was told, one who knows how to tend his life with simple normalcy,

does not meet wild animals on the road or know the touch of weapons during war.

The mighty horns of the rhinoceros,

the powerful claws of the tiger,

the sharp blades of weapons,

find nowhere to pierce him.

Why is this so?

Because his mind holds no uncanny thoughts he gives death no opportunity.

L.

Your
Life

The
going forth is life: the coming home is death:

The
followers of life, in every ten,

Are
three!

In
every ten, death s followers, again,

Are
three!

In
every ten the people who from life

Are
moving to the place where death is rife,

Are
three!

What
reason can there be?

They
live their lives in life s intensity.

But there
is one, as I have heard it said,

So
good in managing his living trust,

That
he may travel far and never dread

Rhinoceros
or tiger fang or thrust,

Or
warlike host with garb and weapons red;

There

is
no spot in which to thrust the horn,

No
place the tiger finds to fix his claws,

The
soldier s weapon from its aim doth turn,

Now,
why is this? Because

In
him death finds no place of mortal flaws.

We come into Life, we enter Death.

Three out of ten men follow the way of Life.

Three out of ten men follow the way of Death

Also there are three out of ten who live as men and yet they move on to the place of Death.

What a Master is he, therefore, who takes hold of life, of real Life!

He lives, his ears open to goodness, listening to hidden things.

In travelling, he fears not the rhinoceros nor tiger.

In entering the war-chariot, he dreads not the weapons of the soldier.

Can a rhinoceros with his horn strike the Inner Life?

Can a tiger with his claw tear the Inner Life?

Can a soldier with his weapon pierce the valley of Inner Life?

What a Master is he, therefore, who into the place of Death can bring his Inner Life!

When one is out of Life,

one is in Death.

The partners of

Life are thirteen;

the partners of

Death are thirteen;

When a living person

moves into

the Realm of Death,

his partners are also thirteen.

How is this?

Because they draws upon

the property of

Life too heavily.

They who knows well how to live

meets no tigers

or wild buffaloes on their road,

comes out

from the battle-ground

not touched by the soldiers of war.

For, in them,

a buffalo would

find no target for his horns,

a tiger

nothing to put

his claws upon,

and a soldier of war

no place for its tool to enter.

How is this?

Because there is

no room for Death

in them.

Coming forth (man) is born, entering he dies.

Followers of life there are three in ten; followers of death there are three in ten; and men who, while regarding life as life, in their every act tend towards the death-spot, there are also three in ten.

Why is that? Because of the excessive manner in which they regard life as life.

For indeed, I have heard that one who has a firm purchase on life, when travelling overland, meets neither tiger no rhinoceros, and when going into battle, he wears no cuirass no does he bear arms. A rhinoceros would find nowhere to butt its horn, a tiger would find nowhere to fix its claws, weapons would find no room to enter their blades. Why is that? Because he has no death-spot.

Men come forth and live; they enter (again) and die.

Of
every ten three are ministers of life (to themselves); and three

are ministers of death.

There
are also three in every ten whose aim is to live, but whose

movements tend to the land (or place) of death. And for what reason?

Because of their excessive endeavours to perpetuate life.

But
I have heard that he who is skilful in managing the life

entrusted to him for a time travels on the land without having to shun

rhinoceros or tiger, and enters a host without having to avoid buff

coat or sharp weapon. The rhinoceros finds no place in him into which

to thrust its horn, nor the tiger a place in which to fix its claws,

nor the weapon a place to admit its point. And for what reason?

Because there is in him no place of death.

A person comes forth into Life and passes into Death.
Three
out of ten are partners of Life;
Three out of ten are partners of Death;

And those whose every act leads them to Death
because they cling desperately
to Life are also three in ten.
Now,
what is the Reason for this?!
It is because all of these CLING.
Indeed,
I have heard it said that those who can save life
do not avoid tigers or
rhinoceroses
when out walking in the hills;
nor do they put on armor
and take up weapons
when they approach a battlefield.
The rhinoceros
has no place to jab it's horn,
the tiger has no place to fasten it's claws,

and weapons have no place to put their blades.
Now,
what is the Reason for this?!
Because in them there is no remaining Mortality.

Between
the time when they are born

And the time that they will die

Three in ten will follow life

Three others only will deny

Three
others are so casual

They live as though they're passing through

But one remains who clearly sees

There's not a single thing to do

Can
you be like the one who sees

The world emerging on its own?

What's needed for each moment

Arises from the great unknown

This
one doesn't have a fear

Of weaponry or wild beast

These enemies can't harm the one

Whose separate self is long deceased

WHEN one is out of Life, one is in Death. The

companions of life are thirteen; the companions

of Death are thirteen; and, when a living person moves

into the Realm of Death, his companions are also thir-

teen. How is this? Because he draws upon the resources

of Life too heavily.

It is said that he who knows well how to live meets

no tigers or wild buffaloes on his road, and comes out

from the battle-ground untouched by the weapons of

war. For, in him, a buffalo would find no butt for his

horns, a tiger nothing to lay his claws upon, and a

weapon of war no place to admit its point. How is this?

Because there is no room for Death in him.

Being born, we come into life, one day we must enter into death.

Out of ten people, three celebrate and are filled with life,

Three hasten their demise through excess,

And three pass through life without realizing it,

Why is this? They try too hard to protect and preserve this life; thereby they never learn to live.

But it is said that one in ten knows how to preserve his life by emptying himself to the world and the Way.

Such a one can go into the wilds unmolested by wild beasts;

the tigers claws and rhinoceros horns will find no place to catch him.

And he may enter battle unarmored; sharp points will find no place to pierce him.

Why is this? Because there is no place for death in him.

Those who leave the womb at birth

and those who enter their source at death,

of these; three out of ten celebrate life,

three out of ten celebrate death,

and three out of ten simply go from life to death.

What is the reason for this?

Because they are afraid of dying,

therefore they can not live.

I
have heard that those who celebrate life

walk safely among the wild animals.

When they go into battle, they remain unharmed.

The animals find no place to attack them

and the weapons are unable to harm them.

Why? Because they can find no place for death in them.

Existence consists of both life and death. Favouring either life or death denies existence and creates tension. Tension causes people to make mistakes in critical situations. Mistakes are far more deadly than existence itself.

Thirty percent of the people love life and fear death.

Another thirty percent prefer death and avoid life.

Another thirty percent fear both life and death.

Ninety percent of the people suffer the tension that comes from the tension that comes from ignorance of how polarities work. Even though life and death are opposites, they are inseparable. Preferences are futile.

Only ten percent have the wisdom to accept both life and death as facts and simply enjoy the dance of existence. After all, growth and decay are everywhere, all the time.

The wise leader knows that everything comes and goes. So why grasp or cling? Why worry or cringe? Why live in a fantasy of what might happen?

The ferocious dog bites the excited person. The conscious and centered person walks by unharmed.

The wise leader exists without either loving death or fearing death. This freedom keeps the leader safe from harm.

From birth to death,

Three people out of ten are celebrators of Life.

Three people out of ten are advocates of Death.

The rest simply move numbly from cradle to grave.

Why is this?

Because they are overly protective of this life.

It is said that one who knows how to protect his life can

walk freely without fear of the wild buffalo or tiger.

He may meet an army bravely with neither sword nor shield.

For the buffalo will find no place to sink its horns,

The tiger finds no place to dig his claws,

Weapons find no soft spot to pierce. Why?

Because there is no place for death in him.

From
birth to death;

Three in ten are manifesting life,

Three in ten are disintegrating into death,

and three in ten are between,

manifesting life and disintegrating

into death.

Why?

Because the vast majority of humanity

distinguishes life and death.

The
person who is at one with all things

can go anywhere without fear of

vicious animals or dangerous persons.

Why?

Because she is at one with the wild animals,

they perceive her as themselves.

Because she is at one with dangerous

persons,

they fear her.

Life begets, Death receives.

The unborn are 3 in 10.

The dead are 3 in 10.

Mortal men active in life are also 3 in 10.

Now, what is the significance of the immortals?

There are stories about ones who survive.

They meet no tigers or rhinos on the road,

in war they go without armor.

Rhinos have nowhere to thrust their horns,

Tigers have nowhere to sink their claws,

Weapons have nowhere to pierce their blades.

So why are they untouched by Death ?

Between being born and dying

Three out of ten are companions of life;

Three out of ten are companions of death.

And three out of ten in their lives progress from activity to death;

Why is this?

Because they strive too intensely after life.1

It is well known that those who know how to live properly can go out

Without fear of meeting rhinoceros or tiger.

Caught in the fray, weapons cannot harm them.

The rhinoceros cannot gore them with its horn;

The tiger cannot maul them with its claws;

And weapons can find no place to pierce.

Why is this?

For them there is no such thing as death.

1. All translators find these lines particularly hard to interpret. 'Three out of ten' presumably means 'one third' (see Lau 1963, 57). Henricks notes (1990, 122) that these lines can be taken to mean 'roughly speaking, one-third of humanity seems to be born to ... live a long time no matter what they do; another third seems born fated to ... die young no matter what they do; and, finally, another third can live long or die young depending on how they live, but they hasten their journey to death with their anxiety to hold on to life'. (Henricks, reluctantly, favours a different interpretation, based on his own, different, preferred translation of this chapter. His reasons for preferring his different translation are quite involved and technical, and cannot be gone into here. See Henricks 1990, 123.)

Life and death co-exist in the same process.

The chance for life is thirty percent.

The chance for death is thirty percent.

The chance for death in the life's area is also thirty percent.

Why?

Because some live too actively for their lives.

It has been said that people good at living

Do not meet with tigers on land,

Or receive hits in battle.

Tigers can have no chance to apply their paws.

Weapons can have no chance to exert their edges.

Why?

Because people good at living have no chance of death.

"Setting out to live is entering into death."

"Thirteen are the life givers thirteen are the death bringers." The thirteen body parts are also death spots in people's life and activity? Why? Because they live life so lavishly.

So we hear: One who Excels at fostering life "travels on land without meeting rhinoceros or tiger enters combat without armour or weapon."

The rhinoceros finds no place to jab its horn the tiger finds no place to lay its claws a weapon finds no place where its point can enter. Why? Because he has no death spot.

People are born on the Earth and die. Out of ten about three continue then paradisiacal existence; three go to hell by the path of death; and three yet are those who have not succeeded in the development of soul due to attachments to worldly affairs.

He who mastered the true life when living on the Earth is not afraid of rhinoceros or tigers; in the battle he is not afraid of armed soldiers. A rhinoceros has no place to plunge its horn into him, a tiger has no place to fasten its claws onto him, soldiers have no place to stab him with swords. It is so, because to him there is no death.*

* He who with the help of the methods of buddhi yoga became a large spiritual heart or even merged with Tao — quite naturally feels himself non-corporeal. Such a person — as a large consciousness — cannot be wounded by animals or weapon. He is Immortal.

Coming into the world is getting out of the Tao Way.

The death time is the time of going back into Tao, into the rest.

The Wise Person knowing that doesn't disturb the harmony.

He waits to understand what is shown to him.

When light is shown, it is sure he is on the Tao Way,

All dangers are thus avoided.

Although he lives in the world, he is on the Tao Way, always at rest.

His death is no more but a continuation.

Emerging
is being born; entering is dying. Three out of ten are disciples of life. Three
out of ten are disciples of death. Three out of ten move in the course of their
lives toward the realm of death. For what reason? Because they would augment
the richness of life. Now I have heard that those who are good at aiding life
when travelling on land do not encounter rhinoceroses and tigers. When they
enter armed conflict they need not bear arms or armour. There is nowhere for
the rhinoceros to gore with its horn. The tiger finds no place to sink its claws.
Weapons find no place to lodge their blades. Why? Because there is no death-place
in him.

Coming out means life; going in means death.

Three-tenths of men are disciples of life.

Three-tenths of men are disciples of death.

Three-tenths of men actually have life, but strive for death through activity.

Why is this so?

Because they over-nourish themselves.

So I have heard that he who is capable of sustaining life

Can travel on land without ever encountering a rhinoceros or tiger;

Can enter a battle without ever being touched by arms and weapons.

The rhinoceros cannot charge him with its horns.

The tiger cannot attack him with its claws.

Weapons have no place to lodge their blades.

Why is this so?

Because he has no grounds for death.

The Art of Survival

As life goes out, death comes in.

Life has thirteen paths;

Death has thirteen paths.

Human life arrives at the realm of death

Also in thirteen moves.

Why is this so?

Because life is lived lavishly.

Now, as it is well known,

Those skilled in attracting life

Can travel across the land

And not meet a rhinoceros or tiger.

When the military comes in,

Their defence cannot be attacked.

The rhinoceros is without a place to thrust its horn.

The tiger is without a place to affix its claw.

The military is without a place to admit its blade.

Why is this so?

Because they are without the realm of death.

When drinking tea, don't talk of coffee. When drinking coffee, don't talk of tea. Wholly give yourself up. Have no illusion about death, your mind or your body. Flow like the oceans waves. Rest after your work is complete.

On leaving life, to enter death:

Thirteen members form a living body;

A corpse has thirteen, too:

Thirteen spots by which a man may pass

From life to death. Why so?

Because his way of life

Is much too gross.

As
I have heard, the man who knows

On land how best to be at peace

Will never meet a tiger or a buffalo;

In battle, weapons do not touch his skin.

There is no place the tiger's claws can grip;

Or with his horn, the buffalo can jab;

Or where the soldier can insert his sword.

Why so? In him there is no place of death.

When one is born, he will eventually naturally meet his death.

Three out of every ten people will enjoy long life,

While three out of every ten people will meet premature death.

Chances that one strives to live and will die are also three out of ten.

And for what reason?

Because that one intensively craves life (and contrarily he fails to attain his objective).

I heard that one who is good at preserving his life is not afraid of meeting tigers or rhinoceroses when traveling on the land, and he will not be injured of killed in fighting battles.

(To those who are good at preserving their lives)

The rhinoceros cannot butt its horns against him,

The tiger cannot fasten its claws in him,

And weapons cannot thrust their blades into him.

For what reason are all these?

Because he is out of the range of death.

We emerge into life, enter into death.

Three out of ten are adherents of life;

three out of ten are adherents of death;

and there are three out of ten whose way of life also leads them to death.

Why is this so?

It is due to placing too much emphasis on life.

For I have heard that one good at preserving life, when traveling by land, does not encounter the wild buffalo and, when entering the army, suffers no wound from weapons.

The wild water buffalo has no way to strike at him with horn, the tiger has no way to strike at him with claw, and weapons of war have no way to use point or edge against him.

Why is this so?

It is due to the fact that he stays free of the land of death.

1. We come out into life and go back into death.

2. The companions of life are thirteen;

3. The companions of death are thirteen;

4. And yet people, because they regard life as LIFE, in all of their actions
move towards the thirteen that belong to the realm of death.

5. Now, why is this so?

6. It's because they regard life as LIFE.

7.
You've no doubt heard of those who are good at holding on to life:

8. When walking through hills, they don't avoid rhinos and tigers;

9. When they go into battle, they don't put on armor or shields;

10. The rhino has no place to probe with its horn;

11. The tiger finds no place to put its claws.

12. And weapons find no place to hold their blades.

13. Now, why is this so?

14. Because there is no place for death in them.

People who look

for the secret of long life

wind up dead.

Their bodies
are the focus of their lives

and the source of their death,

because they think a healthy body

is all there is to life.

Lao Tzu used
to say

a man who truly understood life

could walk through the jungle

without fear

or across a battlefield

without armor, totally unarmed.

Wild animals and weapons couldn't kill him.

I know, I know:

what the hell does that mean?

"Well, he couldn't be killed,"

Lao Tzu said,

"because his body

wasn't where he kept his death."

Those Who Preserve Life

Coming into life and going out at death,

the organs of life are thirteen;

the organs of death are thirteen;

and these thirteen make life vulnerable to death.

Why is this so?

Because they feed life too grossly.

It is said that those who preserve life

walk the earth without fearing tigers and wild buffalo,

and in battle they are not touched by weapons of war.

The wild buffalo's horns find nothing to gore;

the tiger's claws find nothing to tear;

and weapons' points find nothing to pierce.

Why is this so?

Because they have nothing for death to enter.

(Note: The thirteen organs of life may refer to the nine openings

in the body and the four limbs.)

Going forth into life means moving toward death.

Three out of ten affirm this life Three out of ten affirm the life beyond Three out of ten negate this life and fear death.

These nine see but the outer life and fall prey to death.

The tenth, however the Sage moves through the outer life without yea and nay without greed and fear sure of the inner truth.

No external power can stay him no force can destroy him no death can hit him for he is living beyond the realm of death.

The Preserving of Life

Lao Tze says,

Men come forth from their mothers' wombs and live;

and they enter dust, and die.

Those men who depend on the three and ten to live;

die by the three and ten also.

Those who were living will be sent to the place of death by the three and ten.

And for what reason?

Because they made excessive stores to perpetuate their life.

For I have heard it is said that one who excels in safeguarding his own life does not shun the rhinoceros or tiger when travelling on land, nor does he avoid buff coat and sharp weapon at entering a host.

The rhinoceros finds no place to fix its claw on him, nor the weapon a place to admit its point on him.

And for what reason?

Because there is no place of death on him.

THE VALUE SET ON LIFE

In
looking at the people, we might see

that in the space twixt birth and death,

one third follow life, and one third death,

and those who merely pass from birth to death,

are also one third of those we see.

He
who lives by the way of the Tao,

travels without fear of ferocious beasts,

and will not be pierced in an affray,

for he offers no resistance.

The universe is the centre of his world,

so in the inner world

of he who lives within the Tao,

there is no place

where death can enter in.

The Master gives himself up

to whatever the moment brings.

He knows that he is going to die,

and her has nothing left to hold on to:

no illusions in his mind,

no resistances in his body.

He doesn't think about his actions;

they flow from the core of his being.

He holds nothing back from life;

therefore he is ready for death,

as a man is ready for sleep

after a good day's work.

Throughout human life, from birth to death:

There are one third who die naturally;

There are one third who die from disease;

And the other one third who die by speeding to death.

For what reasons have they done so?

Because they live by overdrawing upon their lives heavily.

As I used to hear that:

"One who takes good care of his life will not meet a rhinoceros or a tiger when he is traveling on land.

He does not need to wear armour or carry weapons when he is leading an army."

The rhinoceros finds no place to insert its horn.

The tiger finds no place to put its claws.

Weapons of war find no place to thrust their blades.

For what reasons?

Because one never lets himself be in a vulnerable situation.

We live, we die.

The companions of life are three and ten.

The companions of death are three and ten.

That people live their active life necessarily leading to the ground of death is three and ten.

Why so?

It is the nature of life itself.

As a matter of fact, I hear of those who are good at preserving their lives:

Walking through, not avoiding rhinos and tigers.

Entering battle without wearing armaments.

The rhino has no place to dig its horns.

The tiger has no place to drag its claws.

The soldier has no place to thrust his blade.

Why is this so?

Because they have no place to die.

L

We
all come out into life and go back into death

There are certain signs that point to life and certain signs that point to death

And yet people, in their desire to show they are alive

Often cultivate the signs of death

Those
who cultivate the signs of life have no fear in them

They don't run from wild animals or cover themselves with armor and shields

They know the horn, the claw, the weapon

Can not pierce what yields and flows like water

They
do not cultivate the signs of death, and so death has no place to enter

From Life into Death

Exiting life, we enter death.

The followers of life are three out of ten,

the followers of death are three out of ten;

in the lives of the people,

the dying grounds on which they are agitated

are also three out of ten.

What is the reason?

Because of the seriousness

with which they take life as life.

It has been said

that those who maintain life well

do not meet rhinos or tigers on land

and do not arm themselves in war.

There is no way for rhinos to gore them;

there is no way for tigers to claw them;

there is no way for weapons to get at them.

Why? Because they have no dying ground.

In the life and death cycle,

Three in ten enjoy natural longevity,

Three in ten die normally.

There are some, three in ten, who die unnaturally.

Why it is so?

Because they indulge themselves excessively.

It is well known that those who are good at protect themselves steer clear of rhinos and tigers when walking, And hardly hurt by armed enemy.

This is because rhinos cannot find them to gore,

Tigers cannot find them to claw,

Enemies cannot get a chance to use weapons upon them.

What is the reason?

They never put themselves into a fatal situation.

"Out" is life; "In" is death.

Three in ten are followers of life.

Three in ten are followers of death.

Three in ten live as man but act in the realm of death.

How is this?

Because they all crave life.

It is said that he who knows well how to live meets no tigers or rhinoceroses on his road, and comes into the battlefield untouched by the weapons.

For, in him, a rhinoceros would find no place for his horns, a tiger no place to lay his claws upon, and a weapon no place to lodge its point.

How is this?

Because there is no room for death in him.

In the journey of life and death,

three in ten will live a long life,

three in ten will die before their time.

There are also three in ten will survive from the extreme dangerous situations.

Why is this so?

Because they know the ways of surviving.

Who knows how to preserve his own life,

will not meet rhinoceros or tigers in traveling,

will not be wounded in battle.

Because, rhinoceroses can find no place to thrust their horn,

tigers no place to use their claws,

weapons no place to pierce.

Why?

Because, he will not place himself into those situations.

When going off one way means living

and going off the other way means dying,

three in ten are companions of Life,

three in ten are companions of Death, and

three in ten value Life but drift toward Death.

Why
is all this so?

Because, these people are too greedy about living.

It
is said:

People who are skillful in caring

for the life that has been given to them

travel abroad without fear of wild ox or tiger,

and enter a battle without concern for sharp weapons.

There is no place for the wild ox to thrust its horns,

there is no place for the tiger to put its claws,

there is no place for a weapon to lodge.

How
is this so?

Because, there is no place for Death to enter in!

In
wanting to live life more fully

one dies.

Some people live forcefully in order to evade death.

Some people die within themselves in order to evade life.

Some people just survive with a human body

as life becomes a thing to have or get or lose.

But
others who follow the way seem to be impervious

to car accidents or woods at night or the bomb.

Stray cars find nothing to hit,

the woods contain no lions or tigers or bears,

the bomb finds no bodies to burn.

Why?

Because people prepared to die live

and those prepared to live die.

Life generates death

and death life.

He who aims at life could achieve his death. Out of living, death pops up. Who
comes to life can go to death.

If three out of ten are life companions, then the same number are death companions
as well. As such the latter are labelled death-spots: some take life, through
activity, to death.

How is it?

Its much due to men's intensive striving after life; in part the intense activity
of multiplying life. Some do feed life too grossly.

It's said that he who is a good preserver of his life can meet no tigers or
wild buffaloes on land. Such a one could have a true hold on life,

If so, in battle or fighting he should hardly try to escape from weapons. He
should neither get very much touched nor vulnerable to weapons in battle. [Cf.
dont be there]

The wild buffalo cannot butt its powerless horns against him,

The tiger cannot fasten its then useless claws in him and tear him apart,

And much absent weapons of war should find no place to enter - cannot thrust
their blades into him. [The absent part is always to blame. Demagogy]

And why? (Demagogy, thats why]

In him there's no room for death because he is beyond death. Others find no
Achilles heel in him then and there.

A person comes forth to life and enters into death.

Three out of ten are partners of life,

Three out of ten are partners of death,

And the people whose every movement leads them to the land of death because they cling to life

Are also three out of ten.

Now,

What is the reason for this?

It is because they cling to life.

Indeed,

I have heard that

One who is good at preserving life does not avoid tigers and rhinoceroses when he walks in the hills;

nor does he put on armor and take up weapons when he enters a battle.

The rhinoceros has no place to jab its horn,

The tiger has no place to fasten its claws,

Weapons have no place to admit their blades.

Now,

What is the reason for this?

Because on him there are no mortal spots.

Men go forth from Life and enter into Death.

The Gates of Life are thirteen in number; and the same are the Gates of Death.

By as many ways does life pass quickly into Death. And wherefore?

Because men strive only after the Sensuous Life.

It has been said that one who knows how to safeguard Life can go through the country without protection against the rhinoceros and tiger.

He may enter into battle without fear of the sword.

The rhinoceros finds no place wherein to drive his horn.

The tiger finds no place wherein to fix his claws.

The sword finds no place wherein to thrust itself.

Why is this?

It is because he has overcome Death.

Do Not Withhold Yourself

Do not withhold yourselves from each other.

To withhold is to lie to yourself

and to each other.

Do not withhold your feelings

but share them openly and with compassion.

Do not withhold your forgiveness

but give it freely as a natural gift.

Do not withhold your delight

but dance and laugh and play with ease.

Do not withhold your body,

but give it often in the myriad ways of passion.

Withholding comes from fear of loss.

We hesitate and resist,

trying to insulate ourselves from pain.

Don't be afraid.

Look for ways to open up

and trust each other a bit more fully.

Feel how it eases the tension

in your body and in your mind.

Man comes in to life and goes out to death.

Three out of ten are companions of life. Three out of ten are
companions of death. And three out of ten in their lives lead from
activity to death. And for what reason? Because of man's intensive
striving after life.

I have heard that one who is a good preserver of his life will not
meet tigers or wild buffaloes, And in fighting will not try to escape
from weapons of war.

The wild buffalo cannot butt its horns against him, The tiger cannot
fasten its claws in him, And weapons of war cannot thrust their blades
into him. And for what reason? Because in him there is no room for
death.

Death might
appear to be the issue of life,

Since for every three out of ten being born

Three out of ten are dying.

Then why

Should another three out of ten continue breeding death?

By use of sheer madness to multiply.

But there is one out of ten, they say, so sure of life

That tiger and wild bull keep clear of his inland path.

Weapons turn from him on the battle-field,

No bull-horn could tell where to gore him,

No tiger-claw where to tear him,

No weapon where to enter him.

And why?

Because he has no death to die.

Of people's lives from beginning to end,

One-third live long,

One-third die young,

And one-third live in the beginning, but cause their deaths half way by themselves.

Why do people die in the middle of their lives?

Because they live too well and do not cherish their lives.

It is said that those who know how to live long never come across a rhinoceros or a tiger;

When they are in battle, they never get hurt.

The rhinoceros has no place to impale them with its horn,

The tiger has no place to attack them with its claws,

And the weapon has no place to hurt them with its blade.

Why is this? Because they never get themselves into these deadly places.

Life is appearance; death is disappearance.

Three out of ten live a long life.

Three out of ten live a short life.

Three out of ten bring upon themselves an untimely death,

Because they cling too much to outer pleasures of life.

He who maintains a balanced life in accordance with the Tao,

Does not meet tigers or rhinoceroses in the wilderness,

Does not suffer attacks from the enemy in the battlefield.

Upon him the tiger has no place to fasten its claws,

The rhinoceros has no place to jab its horn,

The weapon has no place to pierce its blade.

Why is this so?

Because in him there is no room for death to enter.

Life and death co-exist in the same process.

The chance for life is thirty percent.

The chance for death is thirty percent.

The chance for death in the life's area is also thirty percent.

Why?

Because some live too actively for their lives.

It has been said that people good at living

Do not meet with tigers on land,

Or receive hits in battle.

Tigers can have no chance to apply their paws.

Weapons can have no chance to exert their edges.

Why?

Because people good at living have no chance of death.

Being born, we come into life, one day we must enter into death.

Out of ten people, three celebrate and are filled with life,

Three hasten their demise through excess,

And three pass through life without realizing it,

Why is this? They try too hard to protect and preserve this life; thereby they never learn to live.

But it is said that one in ten knows how to preserve his life by emptying himself to the world and the Way.

Such a one can go into the wilds unmolested by wild beasts;

the tigers claws and rhinoceros horns will find no place to catch him.

And he may enter battle unarmored; sharp points will find no place to pierce him.

Why is this? Because there is no place for death in him.

