===== Chapter 53 =====

Making myself pure, having understanding

I travel on the great Tao.

It gives only this fear:

The great Tao is exceedingly level

But people are pleased with byways.

The imperial court taxes to the extreme.

The fields are altogether overgrown with weeds.

The granaries are completely empty.

Clothed in elegant silk

Girded with sharp swords

Glutted with food and drink

Having a surplus of property and money—

This is called robbing and boasting [about it].

Besides, it's not the Tao!

Having some knowledge When walking on the Great Tao Only brings fear.

The great Tao is very smooth, But people like rough trails.

The government is divided, Fields are overgrown, Granaries are empty,.

But the nobles clothes are gorgeous, Their belts show off swords, And
they are glutted with food and drink. Personal wealth is excessive. This
is called thieves' endowment, But it is not Tao.

If my knowledge were really minute

While following great Tao,

I' only fear that I might drift from it.

Tao is easy to follow.

Yet people prefer to stray from it.

They keep the halls of authority in splendor,

But the fields remain untilled

And the granaries stand empty.

Clad in fineries, they carry sharp swords.

They eat too much and possess to excess.

What they do is thievery.

Thievery is not Tao.

ROBBER BARONS

Possessing a modicum of awareness and insight,

Follow the straight path of the Tao.

A true fear might be in straying.

The path,

Being so safe and easy -

So visibly smooth and straight -

Its utter simplicity places it beyond belief.

By nature people seem compelled to

seek the devious by-paths.

So frequently are the highly visible palaces adorned in splendor,

While the fields are left to weed and the granaries stand empty.

Wearing elegant clothes, carrying sharp swords,

Glutting themselves with food and drink -

Possessing more than can be consumed -

All this, the province of robber barons,

Is far from the true path of the Tao.

Because I lack importance, I have perception.

I walk with the glorious Tao.

I dread straying from its path.

The path of the great Tao is deceptively smooth and the people are liable to take side paths.

Palaces will have excess splendor.

Fields will have excess weeds.

Granaries will be very empty.

People will be dressed in elegant clothes.

People will have excessive food and drink.

They will have a surplus of wealth and possessions.

This is called stealing and exaggeration, not the Tao!

THE WITNESS OF GREED

Were I discovered by men, and charged with government, my first would be

lest I should become proud.

The
true Path is level and smooth; but men love by-paths.

They
adorn their courts, but they neglect their fields, and leave their

storehouses empty. They wear elaborate and embroidered robes; they gird

themselves with sharp swords; they eat and drink with luxury; they heap

up goods; they are thievish and vainglorious. All this is opposite to

the Way of Tao.

If I were suddenly to become known, and (put into a position to) conduct(a government) according to the Great Tao, what I should be most afraidof would be a boastful display. The great Tao (or way) is very level andeasy; but people love the by-ways. Their court(-yards and buildings) shallbe well kept, but their fields shall be ill-cultivated, and their granariesvery empty. They shall wear elegant and ornamented robes, carry a sharpsword at their girdle, pamper themselves in eating and drinking, and havea superabundance of property and wealth;-such (princes) may be called robbersand boasters. This is contrary to the Tao surely!

When I possess True Knowledge

I will stroll on the right and simple road

I will avoid side paths

Because the straight road is easy to walk

But most people love the narrow side paths

The residences of the rich are neat and clean

But the fields of the poor are filled with weeds

And their granaries are empty

The elite wear generously-decorated and expensive clothes

Sharp swords hang on their waists

They stuff and they swill

They lose themselves in possession and wealth

They flaunt their stolen gear

Now, isn't that conscienceless?

Let us be intelligent and follow Nature itself. Let us not stray.

Nature's way is simple and easy, but men prefer the intricate and artificial.

When they congregate in artistically engineered cities, and neglect their farms, their food supply is cut off.

When they bedeck themselves with ornaments and weapons, and display their fancy foods and rich properties, they thereby invite thievery. This is acting unnaturally.

He who has the least scrap of sense,

Once he has got started on the great highway has nothing to fear

So long as he avoids turnings.

For great highways are safe and easy.

But men love by-paths.

So long as Court is in order

They are content to let their fields run to weed

And their granaries stand empty.

They wear patterns and embroideries,

Carry sharp swords, glut themselves with drink and food,

Have more possessions than they can use.

These are the riotous ways of brigandage; they are not the Highway.

If I have the least bit of knowledge

I will follow the great Way alone

and fear nothing but being sidetracked.

The great Way is simple

but people delight in complexity.

The government is corrupt.

The fields are overgrown.

The granaries are empty.

Yet some wear fine clothes,

carry sharp swords,

gorge on food and drink,

and are surrounded by luxury.

They are thieves.

This is certainly not the great Way.

Let our resolve here be this: to be understanding

To travel upon the great way

(With) only distractions to fear

The great way is so very ordinary

And the people love the detours

The courts are so very well kept

The fields, so very weedy

The granaries, so very empty

The clothes, refined & elaborate

Sharp swords worn at the waist

A glut of drinking & feasting

Wealth & goods kept in heaps

This describes robbery & bombast

Surely not the way at all

Distractions

Were I have the least bit of knowledge,

In walking on a Great Road

it is only going stray that I Would fear.

Keeping to the main road is easy,

But people greatly delight in tortuous paths.

The courts are swept very clean;

While the fields are full of weeds;

And the granaries are all empty.

Their clothing - richly embroidered and colored,

While at their waists they carry sharp swords,

And indulge themselves with food and drink;

And of possessions they have plenty.

It is called thievery!

And thievery is certainly not the way of Tao.

Because I have a little wisdom, I choose to walk the great path of Tao and fear nothing except to stray from it.

The great way is very smooth and easy, but some people are fond of getting sidetracked.

When a ruler's palace is full of treasure, the people's fields are weedy and their granaries are empty.

If the ruler wears fancy clothes and his house is full of weapons, if his table is laden with extravagant food and drink and everywhere one looks he has more wealth than he can use, the ruler is a robber and thief. This is not in keeping with Tao.

If ego had a scrap of wisdom,

It would seek to walk the path of Tao.

But the problem is that ego tends to wander.

The Cosmic Way is straight and easy,

But people seem compelled

By distraction and complexity.

The palace in the capital

Is bathed in opulence,

While the fields without lie barren,

And the granary is left untended.

They array themselves in lustrous gowns

And gleaming weapons at their sides.

They eat, but are not nourished;

They drink, yet thirst consumes them.

Their lives are bloated with the stuff of wealth.

Extravagance is a thief,

The true self is its victim:

Is this the way of Tao?

I doubt it.

One who follows the Tao is ready to explore his entire being, in all its depth and variety. But one who treads the stark road of ego becomes trapped in side-paths and dead-ends that close off understanding in a cycle of want, frustration, and unceasing effort. The more you grasp for, the more you obtain; the more you obtain, the more you feel you need, and the more your true self is taken from you: thus, "extravagance is a thief."

Lao Tzu uses the final stanza to create a play on words, which cannot be exactly reproduced in English. He uses the word "tao," which means "thief, robber" to say that extravagance is a "tao" which robs one of Tao. For this version, I decided to simply insert a slightly different word-play in the closing couplet, again on the word Tao (pronounced "dow"), so that the answer to Lao Tzu's rhetorical question, "is this the way of Tao?" is, "I dow-ed it." The point of this is not merely to copy Lao Tzu's pun, nor to make the reader laugh (after all, any joke that has to be explained never was a joke), but rather to show that Lao Tzu was not a self-conscious or moralistic thinker. Even when he has a serious point to make, as he does here, he does it without bombast or moral assault.

The Main Path of Tao

Let
me walk along the main path of Tao

and avoid by-paths of worthless knowledge.

I would not leave this main path, so easily followed,

but many people prefer the by-paths.

The
palaces are well kept

while fields go untilled

and the granaries are empty.

To
wear elegant clothes, to carry a fine sword,

to gorge with food and drink, to have wealth and riches,

all this invites plunder.

Is
this not departing from Tao?

When knowledge compels me to practice the supreme Tao, the danger lies in putting it into action.

The supreme Tao is a vast plain, yet the people prefer bypaths. The palace is magnificent, but the fields are full of weeds; the granaries are empty, but elegant clothes are worn; sharp two-edged swords are carried, fastidiousness in eating and drinking is displayed, many useless things are amasses – this is robbery and swaggering.

This is not the Tao!

Let me have sound knowledge and walk on the great way (Tao);

Only I am in fear of deviating.

The great way is very plain and easy,

But the people prefer by-paths.

While the royal palaces are very well kept,

The fields are left weedy

And the granaries empty.

To wear embroidered clothes,

To carry sharp swords,

To be satiated in drink and food,

To be posessed of redundant riches -

This is called encouragement to robbery.

Is it not deviating from Tao?

Increasing evidence

Let me suddenly have some know-how

To exercise on The Great Guide--

Only helping it--this I fear!

The Great Guide is profoundly smooth

and people easily track it.

The palace is profoundly stripped.

Fields are profoundly overgrown.

Granaries are profoundly bare.

Clothes embroidered colorfully.

Belts have sharp swords.

Bored of drink and food.

Wealth and commodities are excessive.

This is called 'stealing.' Exaggeration!

Not a guide!

If I had even a slight awareness,

And practiced the great Way,

What I would fear would be deviating from it.

The great Way is a very level road,

But men like to take circuitous paths.

Thus, the palaces are extremely elegant,

But the people's farms are extremely desolate,

And there is no grain reserved in the storehouses.

The rulers wear expensive garments,

Carry fine swords,

Satiate themselves with food and drink,

And possess inordinate riches and precious things.

This is the greatest robbery,

And is indeed against the great Way.

Should I know just a fraction of Tao,

I would walk on the great way, fearing to impose upon the people.

The main road is smooth to walk but the people prefer the smaller footpath.

That is why the court is corrupt,

the fields lie in waste, the granaries are empty.

Yet the rulers wear clothes adorned with finery,

carry sharp swords decorated with patterns,

possess storehouses overflowing with goods and wealth.

This is to rule by stealing.

This is not the Tao.

Were I but firmly enlightened,

Walking along the great Tao,

My only fear would be going astray.

The great Tao is exceedingly even,

But the sovereign is exceedingly fond of gullies.

While the court is exceedingly well-kept,

The fields are exceedingly weedy,

And the granaries exceedingly empty.

Clad in elegant and colorful attire,

Wearing a sharp sword,

And sated with food,

He has enough wealth and to spare.

Such a man is called the chieftain of bandits;

Being the chieftain of bandits goes against the Tao.

The beginning of the universe, when materialized, is considered to be a mother.

When a man finds the mother, he will know the children, accordingly.

Even though he knows the children, he still clings to the mother:

Therefore, although his body wanes, he never perishes.

The person who shuts his mouth and closes his doors

Will never perish.

If he opens his mouth and increases his affairs,

He will never be saved.

The person who sees the tiniest thing possesses clear vision,

The person who adheres to the weak possesses strength.

Use your light, but dim your brightness,

In this way you will not do yourself any harm.

This is called following the eternal Tao.

Were I possessed of the least knowledge, I would, when walking on the great
way, fear only paths that lead astray.

The great way is easy, yet people prefer by-paths.

The
court is corrupt,

The fields are overgrown with weeds,

The granaries are empty;

Yet there are those dressed in fineries,

With swords at their sides,

Filled with food and drink,

And possessed of too much wealth.

This is known as taking the lead in robbery.

Far
indeed is this from the way.

Gaining Insight

If I have ever so little knowledge, I shall walk in the great Reason. It is but expansion that I must fear.

The great Reason is very plain, but people are fond of by-paths.

When the palace is very splendid, the fields are very weedy and granaries very empty.

To wear ornaments and gay clothes, to carry sharp swords, to be excessive in drinking and eating, to have a redundance of costly articles, this is the pride of robbers.

Surely, this is un-Reason.

Freedom lies in the Tao. Habits are binding. There is freedom in moderation, and bondage in excess. When the wealthy thrive at the expense of others, is this not theft? Is it not chaotic for a rich man to flaunt his money, when those around have barely enough? The violence of excess will end in disaster.

This little I know:

In moving toward the Grand Direction, the only fear is moving astray.

The Grand Direction is straight forward; still, people go astray.

The court is not filled; the field is not tilled.

Storehouses are empty, but gorgeous gowns are aplenty.

Bearing sharp swords, tired of exquisite boards,

With wealth to the burst, they are bandits at their worst.

This is not Direction.

Understanding sparse and sparser still I travel the great Way, nothing to fear unless I stray.

The great Way is open and smooth, but people adore twisty paths:

Government in ruins, fields overgrown and graineries bare,

they indulge in elegant robes

and sharp swords,

lavish food and drink,

all those trappings of luxury.

It's vainglorious thievery -

not the Way, not the Way at all.

Grant me the subtle wisdom, that

I will follow the broad way and be fearful of straying away.

The broad way is flat, yet people still indulge in shortcuts.

The palace is quite splendid, but

The fields are quite desolate, and

The granaries quite empty.

(The rulers are)

Wearing beautiful clothes,

Carrying sharp swords,

Bored of feasts, and

Accumulating excessive wealth and treasures.

These are chieftains of robbers, and

No behaving according to Tao!

Supposing
myself to have as little knowledge as I do

I am doing things relating to great tao

It alone imposes appropriate respect.

Great
tao is very even yet people are fond of byways

Courts are very divided

Fields are very weedy

Granaries are very empty

Clothes are ornamented and patterned

Sharp swords are worn

Food and drink satiate

Money and goods are present in surplus.

Appropriately
called robbery, extravagance

This way is also not tao.

He who has little wisdom, should conform himself to the great Principle. He should take care to avoid any irksome boasting.

But to this wide road many prefer the narrow sidetracks. (Few men walk along the way of obscure disinterestedness. They prefer the narrow tracks of their vanity, their own advantage. This is how the princes of these times act).

When the palaces are too well kept up, the fields go uncultivated and the granaries empty, (because the farm workers are requisitioned for forced labour).

Dressing magnificently, wearing a sharp sword, stuffing oneself with food and drink, amassing wealth to the extent of not knowing what to do with it (as do the princes of these times), is being like a brigand (who ostentatiously plays with his loot). Such conduct is opposed to the Principle.

If I have a little knowledge

Walking on the great Tao

I fear only to deviate from it

The great Tao is broad and plain

But people like the side paths

The courts are corrupt

The fields are barren

The warehouses are empty

Officials wear fineries

Carry sharp swords

Fill up on drinks and food

Acquire excessive wealth

This is called robbery

It is not the Tao!

GAIN BY INSIGHT

Even if one has but a little knowledge he can walk in the ways of the great Tao; it is only self-assertion that one need fear.

The great Tao (Way) is very plain, but people prefer the bypaths. When the palace is very splendid, the fields are likely to be very weedy, and the granaries empty. To wear ornaments and gay colors, to carry sharp swords, to be excessive in eating and drinking, and to have wealth and treasure in abundance is to know the pride of robbers. This is contrary to Tao.

If I have a little (chieh-jan) knowledge (chih),

To walk the great path (Tao),

I shall fear this:

The great path (Tao) is very flat and easy,

Yet others (jen) are fond of bypaths.

The courts are very neat,

The fields are very weedy,

The granaries are very empty.

Wearing embroidered clothes,

Carrying sharp swords,

Being surfeited with foods and drinks.

To accumulate wealth and treasures in excess,

This is called robbery and crime.

This is not to follow Tao.

The Main Path of Tao

Let me walk along the main path of Tao and avoid by-paths of worthless knowledge. I would not leave this main path, so easily followed, but many people prefer the by-paths.

The palaces are well kept while fields go untilled and the granaries are empty. To wear elegant clothes, to carry a fine sword, to gorge with food and drink, to have wealth and riches, all this invites plunder. Is this not departing from Tao?

If I had any sense, I would walk on the main road [the Tao],

and I would fear leaving it.

Keeping to the main road [the Tao] is so easy,

and yet people love to stray from it as they seek shortcuts.

Look! The royal palace is magnificent,

but the fields are full of weeds, and the granaries are empty.

Some are beautifully dressed and bejeweled,

wearing flashy weapons on their belts,

eating and drinking until they burst.

These people—these state–sanctioned crooks—

have far more than they need.

Surely, this isn't the Tao!

Fifty-three

If I have even just a little sense,

I will walk on the main road and my only fear

will be of straying from it.

Keeping to the main road is easy,

But people love to be sidetracked.

When the court is arrayed in splendor,

The fields are full of weeds,

And the granaries are bare.

Some wear gorgeous clothes,

Carry sharp swords,

And indulge themselves with food and drink;

They have more possessions than they can use.

They are robber barons.

This is certainly not the way of Tao.

If I have acquired a little knowledge,

I will be afraid of going astray

When I walk on the road.

The road is even,

Yet people prefer to take by-paths.

While the court is corrupt,

The fields lie waste;

The granaries are empty;

There are persons who are still dressed gaudily,

Wearing ornamented swords,

Satiated with fine food and drink,

In possession of extravagant goods.

They can be called the chieftains of robbers.

What a phenomenon against the Tao!

Let me have even the slightest of wisdom.

Traveling the great way [Tao],

I will only fear going astray.

The great way is level.

Yet people prefer small paths.

The court is overrun with corruption;

The fields are overgrown with weeds;

The granaries are utterly empty;

Yet the officials wear embroidered clothes,

Carry sharp swords,

Feast on food and wine,

Possess more goods than they need.

This is called the robber's extravagance.

It is indeed contrary to Tao!

Even if I confidently know that I am on the right path, I will still tread gingerly for fear of deviating from it.

The correct path of Dao is smooth and easily accessible.

However, people still choose to travel on the small paths.

While the magnificent imperial palace is immaculate and pristine,

The paddy fields are neglected and the granaries empty.

Yet, the ruler still dresses elegantly, wears fine swords and feasts in style.

He continues to amass great personal wealth.

This is the behaviour of a chief of robbers.

He is not following the way of Dao.

Increasing Evidence

I Cheng

If I were determined, with the knowledge I have,

To walk along the Great Highway,

My only fear would be to stray from it.

The Great Highway is very safe and plain;

Yet people prefer the bypaths.

While the Court is very magnificent,

The fields have become very barren,

And the granaries have become very empty;

Yet officials are dressed in gorgeous garments,

Carry sharp swords,

Gorge themselves with sumptuous food and drink,

And possess a superabundance of precious articles.

Such patent robbery is the usher of other robberies.

Verily it goes contrary to Tao.

Let me have the good sense to keep to the Great Highway of Tao;

Only if I go straying into side-turnings shall I have anything to fear.

The Highway is fine and smooth and easy,

But men preger the bypaths.

There the royal palaces are spick and span -

But se how the weeds have sprung up in the fields!

See how empty the granaries are!

Where garments are much bedecked and embroidered,

Where sharp swords hang from every belt,

Where there is gluttony in food and drink,

Where riches are over-abundant -

There you will find that brigandage is rife.

Not so on the Great Highway of Tao!

If I have a grain of wisdom,

I walk along the great Tao

And fear only to stray.

The great Tao is easy indeed,

But the people choose by-paths.

The court is very resplendent;

Very weedy are the fields,

And the granaries very empty.

They wear gaudy clothes,

Carry sharp swords,

Exceed in eating and drinking,

Have riches more than they can use.

Call them robber-braggarts:

They are anti-Tao indeed!

If I had even the tiniest grain of insight,

I should live in accordance with the subtle Way of the universe;

my only fear would be to stray from it.

The Integral Way of the universe is very smooth and straight, yet people's minds prefer devious bypaths.

The courts are polished and decorated,

while the fields are untilled,

and the granaries are empty.

People wear fine clothes to adorn their external appearance.

They carry sharp swords at their sides and worship might rather than righteousness.

They know only to make merry by indulging in food and drink.

They crave to possess more riches than they could ever use.

This is the committing of robbery and is not the Universal Integral Way of natural life.

LIII.

Abundant
Evidence

If,
in some unexpected manner, I

As one
endowed with knowledge should appear,

To
walk according to the mighty Tao,

Tis
only bold display that I should fear;

For
plain and simple ways Great Tao suggest,

But
people love cross-paths and by-ways best.

The
halls and courts are splendid, but the fields

Uncultivated
are, the granaries

Empty;
to put on ornamented robes,

And
keen-edged swords, to gorge with gluttonies,

To
pile up wealth; this, robbers pride I call,

But, of a surety, not Great Tao at all.

If I have knowledge and resolute faith I shall walk in the Great Tao.

If I fear, I can only behave well outwardly.

Great Tao is very straight, But the people love by-roads.

The palace may be well kept, But the fields may be uncultivated And the granaries empty.

The Princes take more land,

At their girdle they carry a sword,

They eat dainty food,

They take possession of much gold.

That is called glorification of robbery.

It is not Tao.

If I had the smallest seed of wisdom,

I would walk the Great Way,

And my only fear

would be to lose my way from it.

The Great Way is very smooth and straight;

And yet the people like better the complicated paths.

The courtyard is very clean and well decorated,

( Their cities appear powerful. )

But the fields are very weedy and wild,

And the grain silo's are very empty!

( But they have lost the skill to feed themselves. )

They wear beautiful clothes,

( They value appearances over substance.)

They carry destructive weapons,

( They use the tools of destruction to get their needs. )

They over fill themselves with food and drink,

( They indulge themselves in the fruits of the conquered. )

They own more riches than they can use!

( They are greedy. )

They are the messengers of lawlessness!

As for Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ),

what do they know about it?

Suppose that with only the least scrap of knowledge I were to walk the great Way, I would only fear turning aside. Though the great Way is quite level, people love bypaths.

When the Court is well purified, but the fields are full of weeds and the granaries are empty, (the rulers) wear decorated and embroidered robes, gird themselves with sharp swords, glut themselves with food, and have superfluous possessions; - this I call robbing and bragging.

It is certainly contrary to the Way.

If I were suddenly to become known, and (put into a position

to) conduct (a government) according to the Great Tao, what I should

be most afraid of would be a boastful display.

The
great Tao (or way) is very level and easy; but people love the

by-ways.

Their
court(-yards and buildings) shall be well kept, but their

fields shall be ill-cultivated, and their granaries very empty. They

shall wear elegant and ornamented robes, carry a sharp sword at their

girdle, pamper themselves in eating and drinking, and have a

superabundance of property and wealth;--such (princes) may be called

robbers and boasters. This is contrary to the Tao surely!

If Ego had even the slightest knowledge of traveling the Path,
it's
only 'fear' would be of going 'astray.'
The Path is quite level, but Egos
LOVE mountain trails!
The
court may be thoroughly deserted,
the fields all choked with weeds,

the granaries, totally empty;
YET
there may still be some who wear bright, fancy clothing,
sharp swords hanging
at their sides;
they walk around gorged with food
and overflowing with
possessions and wealth:
This
is BRAZEN BANDITRY.
This is surely NOT the Path!

This
way is wide and easy

Yet people love to stray

They love to take the sidetracks

And wander from the way

When
the few are rich and wealthy

Living way above their needs

The granaries are empty

And the fields are full of weeds

When
rulers spend on weapons

And implements of war

It's a never ending circle

Of ever wanting more

When
the rich have all abundance

What remains must surely dwindle

Having more than you can use

Is thievery and fraud and swindle

IF only I had the tiniest grain of wisdom,

I should walk in the Great Way,

And my only fear would be to stray from it.

The Great Way is very smooth and straight;

And yet the people prefer devious paths.

The court is very clean and well garnished,

But the fields are very weedy and wild,

And the granaries are very empty!

They wear gorgeous clothes,

They carry sharp swords,

They surfeit themselves with food and drink,

They possess more riches than they can use!

They are the heralds of brigandage!

As for Tao, what do they know about it?

If I possess even the smallest bits of wisdom, I would walk the great way, and my only fear would be in straying from this great road.

The great way is wide and the going is easy, but how people seem to prefer the side paths.

When the offices of government, the palaces and temples are richly adorned, and lavishly outfitted...

when the ministers are concerned chiefly with pomp and display;

the fields will be dusty and overgrown with rank weeds, and the granaries of the land will be bare.

The gentry wear elaborate richly embroidered clothes, eat and drink in excess with their sharp swords at their sides, these are surely the robber barons. This is not in keeping with the Way.

If I understood only one thing,

I would want to use it to follow the Tao.

My only fear would be one of pride.

The Tao goes in the level places,

but people prefer to take the short cuts.

If
too much time is spent cleaning the house

the land will become neglected and full of weeds,

and the granaries will soon become empty

because there is no one out working the fields.

To wear fancy clothes and ornaments,

to have your fill of food and drink

and to waste all of your money buying possessions

is called the crime of excess.

Oh, how these things go against the way of the Tao!

The wise leader leads a quiet and meditative life. But most people are busy getting as many possessions as they can.

The quiet path leads toward a more conscious existence. The busy path creates an exaggerated materialism.

Becoming more conscious leads toward God and a sense of the unity of all creation. But excessive consumption is only possible by exploiting someone.

The world's goods are unevenly distributed. Some have a great deal. Most have very little. We are running out of enough resources to go around. Everyone knows that.

Yet those who are already encumbered by possessions get more and more. They even brag about how much they have. Don't they know what stealing is?

Owning lots of possessions does not come from God. People get it by manipulating other people.

If I possess even a little wisdom

Then while I walk in the light of the Tao

My only fear is that I'l fal into "doing."

The path of the Tao is obvious and simple,

But most people prefer to take short-cuts.

The courts of law are far from the people's hearts.

The fields are ful of weeds, And the storehouses are empty.

But look, here are officials in elegant apparel

carrying sharp swords

Eating and drinking until they are bloated,

Possessed of such wealth that they could never use it all.

I call this positively criminal.

It is not the way of the Tao.

If
I possess just a bit of insight,

I will remember my oneness with Infinity,

and I will only be concerned that I may

become confused with distinctions and

judgment.

The
path of Infinity is easy and peaceful.

But the majority of people cannot

help becoming confused in the manifestations

of the Infinite.

When
rulers and leaders are confused

in pomp and circumstance,

the fields are overgrown with weeds

and the granaries are empty.

When
leaders and rulers

wear extravagant clothing and manipulate the

law

while attending endless banquets

and accumulating wealth for

the sake of wealth,

they are confused and behave like

bandits and thieves.

This
is not the path of peace and harmony.

If I interpret the facts correctly,

following the Great Tao carries only this risk;

the Great Tao is very easy, but people prefer the hard way !

Government is divided. Farms are overgrown. Granaries are empty.

People wear fancy clothes and carry sharp swords,

tire of food and drink, spend money endlessly,

and are said to be corrupt.

Alas, this is not the Way.

Having just a little intelligence

I would keep to the main road,1

My only fear that I might stray from it.

It is easy to keep to the main road,

But the people prefer the by-ways.

When the court is maintained in lavish splendour,

The fields are full of weeds

And the granaries are empty.

Some wear extravagant clothes

And carry sharp swords.

They consume food and drink to excess

And accumulate more wealth and possessions than they can find use for.

This is called robbery and extravagance,

And is contrary to Tao.

1. i.e. follow Tao.

Unless an utter fool, a person should know that

It is not wise to wander here and there

While walking on a wide road.

The wide road is the flattest and safest,

But rulers like to stray from this safe road.

Their courts are luxuriously constructed;

And, while the fields are neglected,

The barns are empty.

They fuss about clothes and ornaments,

Carry sharp swords wherever they go,

Gobble down best food to excess,

And care only for goods and money.

They are robbers rather than rulers.

Being robbers, they are doing things against the Way.

If I had the least bit of understanding I would walk on the great Way. Only display will be dangerous.

The great Way is very smooth but people love bypaths.

The court is very well kept the fields are very weedy the granaries very empty.

"Their clothes are fine and colourful on their belts are sharp swords, they are filled with food and drink" a superabundance of expensive goods. This is robbers boasting, certainly not the Way.

He who possesses the true knowledge walks the Straight Path.

The only thing that I am afraid of is to be absorbed by vanity.

The Straight Path is absolutely even. Yet, people prefer... meandering trails.

If the earthly rulers direct all their attention at the luxury of their palaces, then weeds overgrow fields and granaries become empty. Such earthly rulers wear luxury clothes and sharp swords; they are not satisfied with simple food; they accumulate for themselves too much wealth. This is equal to a robbery and is a violation of the principles of Tao.

By knowing the Tao Way, we can speak about.

If an advice is asked, I will say for you to follow the Tao Way.

Although the Tao Way is easy to follow,

Many people prefer to go on other ways out of ignorance.

Instead
of using resources for life improvement

Some leaders use them for acquiring weapons.

When leaders are not responsible enough,

Population suffers country is impoverished.

Should
I have the least bit of knowledge, fear only that I might use it as I set out
upon the great Dao. The great Dao is very smooth, yet people prefer the shortcuts.
If the court is immaculate, the fields will grow wild and the granneries will
become very empty. To wear embroidered robes and strap on sharp swords, to satiate
oneself with food and drink, and to have an excess of wealth and possessions
[at such a time] is called banditry and excess. Oh! How such activities go against
the Dao.

If only I could have a little knowledge, I would walk in the Great Tao,

Being afraid only of acting on it.

The Great Tao is very smooth,

But people prefer the by-paths;

The court is very well kept;

The fields are full of weeds;

And the granaries are extremely empty.

To wear embroidered clothes,

To carry sharp weapons,

To be satiated in food and drink,

And to have excessive treasures and goods -

This is called robbery and extravagance.

Really, this is not Tao.

The Undivided Path

Using only a little knowledge,

I would travel the Great Way

And fear only of letting go.

The Great Way is very even;

Yet people love the byways.

When an organization is divided,

Fields are overgrown,

Stores are empty,

Clothes are extravagant,

Sharp swords are worn,

Food and drink are excessive,

Wealth and treasure are hoarded.

This is called stealing and exaggeration

And certainly not the Way!

The exciting path that runs through the woods is not necessarily the one to be on. It is the easy route that will lead to the Way. The path that promises illusions delivers sadness. In the false, the rich enjoy exotic foods while the poor scramble for scraps.

When I am walking on the mighty Way,

Let me but know the very least I may,

And I shall only fear to leave the road.

The mighty Way is easy underfoot,

But people still prefer the little paths.

The
royal court is dignified, sedate,

While farmers' fields are overgrown with weeds;

The granaries are empty and yet they

Are clad in rich-embroidered silken gowns.

They have sharp swords suspended at their sides;

With glutted wealth, they gorge with food and drink.

It
is, the people say,

The boastfulness of brigandage,

But surely not the Way!

If I have a certain knowledge,

I will go along the highway (Great Tao),

And I will be afraid on nothing but the oblique way.

The highway is very even,

But the people are fond of the shortcut.

(Those who make) the palace very clear and neat, the field uncultivated and weedy, the granary empty and vacant, wearing glorious and coloured clothes, carrying precious and sharp swords, satiated with exquisite food and drink, possessing an abundance of wealth and property, can be called chieftain to robbers.

That is contrary to rationality (Tao).

If, with firm resolve, I had the knowledge to travel on the great Dao [Way], I need only fear that I might try to meddle with it.

The great Dao [Way] might be very smooth, yet the common folk prefer byways.

The court is kept in good order,

But the fields are overgrown with weeds, the granaries empty.

Garbed in patterned and colorful clothes, wearing sharp swords, satiated with food and drink, and overflowing with wealth and goods: all this is stolen extravagance and has nothing to do with the Dao!

1. Were I to have the least bit of knowledge, in walking on a Great Rod, it's
only going astray that I would fear.

2. The Great Way is very level;

3. But people greatly delight in tortuous paths.

4.
The courts are swept very clean;

5. While the fields are full of weeds;

6. And the granaries are all empty.

7. Their clothing—richly embroidered and colored;

8. While at their waists they carry sharp swords.

9. They gorge themselves on food, and of possessions and goods they have plenty.

10.
This is called thievery!

11. And thievery certainly isn't the Way!

If I had any
sense,

I'd be trying to get right with Tao,

and the only thing I'd worry about

would be messing up.

It's not that hard to get right with Tao,

but people are easily distracted.

"When the
king's palace is full of treasure,"

Lao Tzu said,

"ordinary people's fields

are smothered with weeds,

and the food supplies run out."

Today, you see
sharply dressed people

carrying flashy weapons

and living the high life.

They own more

than they could ever use,

let alone need.

They're nothing

but gangsters and crooks.

That's not what Tao's about.

.

Leaders in Robbery

Those with even a scrap of sense

walk on the main way and fear only straying from the path.

The main way is smooth and easy,

but people like to be side-tracked.

While the courts are arrayed in splendor,

the fields are full of weeds,

and the granaries are empty.

Yet some wear embroidered clothes, carry sharp swords,

over-indulge themselves with food and drink,

and have more possessions than they can use.

They are leaders in robbery.

This is not the Way.

The Sage is living serene and inward Unwise men are busily striving outward.

The one finds gain of Self on the inner Path the masses fall prey to self -seeking on the outer paths.

Gain of Self leads to Tao Self-seeking leads to theft.

What some have too much others lack:

While the fields are lying waste the granaries are bare and want is spreading the possession-possessed build palaces arm themselves with weapons look fine and feast boast of their riches and do not see that their conduct is robbery their property stolen goods not possession of Tao!

Taoku or Tao

Lao Tze says,

Make me have sudden enlightenment,

I can implement great Tao in government.

Still I am afraid I might go astray.

Great Tao is a smooth and easy highway,

My noblemen like to walk on its trails.

Your courtyards are new and pretty,

Your people's farms are still unfilled.

There is nothing in their barns.

You wear your embroidered gowns,

Walk with sharp-bladed swords.

You satiate with good food and drink,

Collect abundant wealth beyond your deserving.

I shall call you Taoku, the bandit's chief,

For you have never practiced the way of the Tao.

EVIDENCE

When
temptation arises to leave the Tao,

banish temptation, stay with the Tao.

When
the court has adornments in profusion,

the fields are full of weeds,

and the granaries are bare.

It is not the way of nature to carry a sword,

nor to over-adorn oneself,

nor to have more than a sufficiency

of fine food and drink.

He
who has more possessions than he can use,

deprives someone who could use them well.

The great Way is easy,

yet people prefer the side paths.

Be aware when things are out of balance.

Stay centered within the Tao.

When rich speculators prosper

While farmers lose their land;

when government officials spend money

on weapons instead of cures;

when the upper class is extravagant and irresponsible

while the poor have nowhere to turn-

all this is robbery and chaos.

It is not in keeping with the Tao.

If I have just a little wisdom to lead me to approach the superior way of Dao, I fear that I may stray from it.

The superior way of Dao is plain and yet man prefers devious paths.

When government officers are very neglected;

farm lands are very weedy;

public granaries are very empty;

yet, brilliant clothes are displayed;

sharp swords are carried;

and excessive food and drinks are over used, and personal wealth and treasures are abundant.

This is called "Exhibition of Robbery".

Really it is aberration of Dao!

Through discrimination, I have the knowledge to walk in the great Tao.

The only fear is what is other than that.

The great Tao is quite smooth, yet people prefer a short-cut.

The court is so busy legislating that the fields go uncultivated and granaries are all empty.

They wear the magnificent clothing, girdle the sharp swords.

They are gorged with food and possess many brides.

Their bounty suffices but they continue to steal.

This is opposite of Tao.

LIII

When
you follow the tao, planning will only lead you astray

The way is easy and straight, but people always look for shortcuts

They leave weeds in the fields to make sure the courtyard is clean

Empty their cupboards so that everyone can gorge

Carry a sword so they can wear their jewels in public

One
excess always leads to another

This wanders far from the way

Causing One Flashes

Causing one flashes of knowledge

to travel the Great

Way, only its application demands care.

The Great Way is quite even,

yet people prefer byways.

When courts are extremely fastidious,

the fields are seriously neglected,

and the granaries are very empty;

they wear colorful clothing and carry sharp swords,

eat and drink to their fill

and possess more than enough.

This is called the vanity of thieves;

it is not the Way.

I firmly believe that I must follow Tao.

What I fear is to wander astray.

Tao is like a boulevard.

Yet, some people prefer small trails.

The yards are excessively clean, the fields full of weeds, and the warehouses nearly empty.

Dressing extravagantly, carrying sharp swords, wasting food, excessively collecting money or properties are the worst sins.

These do not conform to Tao.

If only I had a slight wisdom, I should walk in the great Way, and my only fear would be to stray from it.

The great Way is very smooth and straight; and yet the people prefer circuitous paths.

Nowadays people like circuitous paths, even though these paths bring many evil crimes.

The court is extremely elegant; but the fields are extremely weedy and wild, and the granaries are extremely empty.

They wear gorgeous clothes, they carry sharp swords, they surfeit themselves with food and drink, they possess more riches than they can use.

This is boastful robbery.

And it is indeed against the Way.

If I have even just a little sense,

I will walk on the main road;

my only fear will be of straying from it.

The main road is flat,

yet people love the short cut.

The court, in splendor,

the fields full of weeds,

the warehouses empty.

Some wear gorgeous clothes,

carry sharp swords,

indulge themselves with food and drink,

have more possessions than they can use.

They are robber barons.

Not the way of Tao.

If I have even little sense,

I will walk upon the great path of Tao

and only fear straying from it.

This Great Way is straight and smooth

yet people often prefer the side roads.

The
courtyard is well kept

but the fields are full of weeds,

and the granaries stand empty.

Still, there are those of us

who wear elegant clothes, carry sharp swords,

pamper ourselvcs with food and drink

and have more possessions than we can use.

These are the actions of robbers.

This
is certainly far from the Tao.

To
travel the way is like

following a foot path

to your destination

you have nothing to fear

so long as you

stay on the path

and avoid turning.

Paths are safe and easy

but people like to stray

away.

When government works at setting things right

farmers' fields lie fallow

the silos stay empty

people wear the latest fashion

carry weapons, go out to eat and drink a lot

buy more possessions than they can use

like thieves stocking up.

This
is not the foot path.

Once started on the great [lax] highway, if I had but little [Vossing] knowledge
I should, in walking on a broad way, fear getting off the road. On the main
path (dao), I would avoid the by-paths.

Some dao main path is easy to walk [or drift] on, but safe and easy.

All the same people are fond, men love by-paths, love even small by-paths:

The by-path courts are spick-and-span. And the fields go untilled, nay, exceedingly
weedy. They're content to let their fields run to weed.

All the while granaries stand quite empty and some exceedingly empty.

They have elegant, in clothes and gown to wear, some furnished with patterns
and embroideries,

Some carry sharp weapons, glut themselves with drink and

foods enjoyed beyond limit,

And wealth and treasures are accumulated in excess, owning far more than they
can handle and use.

This is to [molest] the world towards brigandage, it's robbery as extravagance.
In the end they're splitting with wealth and possessions. Wealth splits, tends
to.

This cannot be a highway of dao (the way).

If I were possessed of the slightest knowledge, traveling on the great Way,

My only fear would be to go astray.

The great Way is quite level,

but the people are much enamored of mountain trails.

The court is thoroughly deserted,

The fields are choked with weeds,

The granaries are altogether empty.

Still there are some who wear clothes with fancy designs and brilliant colors,

sharp swords hanging at their sides,

are sated with food,

overflowing with possessions and wealth.

This is called "the brazenness of a bandit."

The brazenness of a bandit is surely not the Way!

Ah that I were wise enough to follow the great Tao!

Administration is a great undertaking.

The great Tao is extremely simple, but the people prefer the complex ways.

While the palace is extremely well appointed, the fields may be full of tares, and the granaries may be empty.

To dress grandly, to carry sharp swords, to eat and drink excessively, and to amass great wealth, this I call stylish theft.

That it is not Tao is certain.

Effortless

Your love together grows

with effortlessness and simplicity.

You will know when you are trying too hard.

There will be an increase in activity

and a decrease in thoughtfulness.

There will be an increase in effort

and a decrease in peace.

There will be an increase in buying things

and a decrease in the enjoyment of them.

There will be an increase in talking

and a decrease in listening.

Living effortlessly is not easy.

It requires great attention

to the simple nurturing activities

that we would rather avoid.

It requires listening and holding.

It requires much time spent in reading love poems

and taking leisurely walks by moonlight.

It requires devoting whole days to the art of love.

When you begin doing these things

you will see how effortless they become.

If I had but little knowledge I should, in walking on a broad way, Fear getting off the road.

Broad ways are extremely even, But people are fond of bypaths.

The courts are exceedingly splendid, While the fields are exceedingly weedy, And the granaries are exceedingly empty.

Elegant clothes are worn, Sharp weapons are carried, Food and drinks
are enjoyed beyond limit, And wealth and treasures are accumulated in
excess. This is robbery and extravagance. This is indeed not Tao (the
Way).

If I had any
learning

Of a highway wide and fit,

Would I lose it at each turning?

Yet look at people spurning

Natural use of it!

See how fine the palaces

And see how poor the farms,

How bare the peasants' granaries

While gentry wear embroideries

Hiding sharpened arms,

And the more they have the more they seize,

How can there be such men as these

Who never hunger, never thirst,

Yet eat and drink until they burst!

There are other brigands, but these are the worst

Of all the highway's harms.

If one day I am to have desires,

As I am walking along a big road, I am only afraid of straying into the small alleys.

The big road is so smooth, but people prefer to take the small alleys.

The government is a mess, the fields are barren, and the barns are empty,

But they wear bright and colorful clothing, carrying sharp swords, overeat and overdrink;

They steal countless treasures, so they are the heads of thieves.

This is completely against the DAO!

With clear, appreciative discernment,

I choose to walk the great way of the Tao,

And fear naught save going astray.

The great way is very smooth and straight,

Yet people prefer uneven and winding by-paths, and thus go astray.

Therefore, in the world that has gone astray,

While the courts are clean and decorated,

The fields are untilled and the granaries are empty.

If the ruler wears fancy clothes,

Carries around sharp swords,

Indulges in extravagant food and drink,

And possesses more riches than he needs,

He is indeed a brazen bandit.

This is contrary to the great way of the Tao.

Unless an utter fool, a person should know that

It is not wise to wander here and there

While walking on a wide road.

The wide road is the flattest and safest,

But rulers like to stray from this safe road.

Their courts are luxuriously constructed;

And, while the fields are neglected,

The barns are empty.

They fuss about clothes and ornaments,

Carry sharp swords wherever they go,

Gobble down best food to excess,

And care only for goods and money.

They are robbers rather than rulers.

Being robbers, they are doing things against the Way.

If I possess even the smallest bits of wisdom,

I would walk the great way, and my only fear would be in straying from this great road.

The great way is wide and the going is easy, but how people seem to prefer the side paths.

When the offices of government, the palaces and temples are richly adorned, and lavishly outfitted...

when the ministers are concerned chiefly with pomp and display;

the fields will be dusty and overgrown with rank weeds, and the granaries of the land will be bare.

The gentry wear elaborate richly embroidered clothes,

eat and drink in excess with their sharp swords at their sides,

these are surely the robber barons.

This is not in keeping with the Way.

