===== Chapter 19 =====

Get rid of sagacity, abandon wisdom:

The people benefit a hundred-fold.

Get rid of humanitarianism, abandon righteousness:

The people recover filial piety and motherly love.

Get rid of cleverness, abandon profit:

Robbers and thieves do not exist.

Those who [understand] these three things

Therefore take [mere] civility to be insufficient.

Therefore, this directive has a place it belongs to:

See the plain.

Embrace simplicity.

Diminish selfishness.

Desire little.

Banish learning, discard knowledge: People will gain a hundredfold.

Banish benevolence, discard righteousness: People will return to duty and compassion.

Banish skill, discard profit: There will be no more thieves.

These three statements are not enough. One more step is necessary.

Look at plain silk; hold uncarved wood. The self dwindles; desires fade.

Give up being great, forget being clever

And people will benefit enormously.

Give up being kind, forget being just

And love will return to the family.

Give up being sly, forget being greedy

And there'll be no more thefts or robberies.

Yet as a lesson

These three are incomplete.

The essential part to be added is this:

Become plain and simple

Like uncut wood.

Restrain your ambitions,

Restrict your desires.

SIMPLICITY

Discard and abandon formalized wisdom and knowledge,

And hundredfold benefits accrue.

Discard and abandon conventionalized righteousness, duty and morality,

And be graced with natural harmony.

Discard and abandon cunning skills - legalized profiteering,

And robbery as well as deception disappear

These three, of themselves insufficient -

Consider then,

- Original simplicity.

- Unadorned nature.

- Selflessness.

- Limited desire.

Renounce holiness, discard certainty, the people will benefit one-hundred fold.

Abandon benevolence with righteousness, people will return to devotion in the family.

Abandon craftiness, discard profit, and thieves and bandits will not appear.

Don't be content to use these three lessons as decorations.

Learn to depend on them.

Recognize simplicity, embrace the purity of uncarved wood or uncut jade.

Reduce self-interest, diminish desires, abandon learnedness, and the people will have no sorrow.

RETURNING TO THE PURITY OF THE CURRENT

If we forgot our statesmanship and our wisdom, it would be an hundred

times better for the people. If we forgot our benevolence and our

justice, they would become again like sons, folk of good will. If we

forget our machines and our business, there would be no knavery.

These
new methods despised the olden Way, inventing fine names to

disguise their baneness. But simplicity in the doing of the will of

every man would put an end to vain ambitions and desires.

Pretend not to saintliness, nor to smartness and the people will prosper!Talk not of Humanity nor of absolute Justice and the people will returnto family devotion. Give up the great profits as well as your Luxuriesand there will be fewer thieves and robbers. In all these things the pretenseis harmful. Therefore one must retain the lasting virtues: To retain Simplegoodness, humility and moderation.

Dispose yourself of worldly knowledge and cleverness

And it will only be good for mankind

Stop pretending to be nice and fair, but be it

Then people will love each other unconditionally

Dispose yourself of the work of your hands and stop serving your self-interest

And there will be no thieves or robbers anymore

But these three things won't be enough

What it's really about is turning back to simplicity

Giving up your selfishness and not wishing for anything

Therefore - If we ignore intricate learning and knowledge of petty distinctions, we shall be many times better off.

If we neglect to insist upon the formal proprieties of etiquette, our intuitive sympathies will return.

If we abolish opportunities for profiteering "within the law," incentive for political corruption will disappear.

If the foregoing three principles are unclear, then at least the following are understandable:

Simply be yourself. Act naturally. Refrain from self-assertiveness. Avoid covetousness.

Banish wisdom, discard knowledge,

And the people will be benefited a hundredfold.

Banish human kindness, discard morality,

And the people will be dutiful and compassionate.

Banish skill, discard profit,

And thieves and robbers will disappear.

If when these three things are done they find life too plain and unadorned,

Then let them have accessories;

Give them Simplicity to look at, the Uncarved Black to hold,

Give them selflessness and fewness of desires.

Banish learning, and there will be no more grieving.

Abandon holiness, renounce wisdom.

It will be a hundred times better for everyone.

Eliminate morality and benevolence.

Love and empathy will naturally return.

Give up cleverness and profit.

Thieves and bandits will disappear.

But those are outward lessons, not the core.

Be simple.

Be true.

Cast off selfhood and desire.

Cut out sanctimony, repudiate cleverness

The people will profit a hundred times over

Cut out benevolence, abandon righteousness

The people return to filial piety & parental affection

Cut out artfulness, abandon rewards

(Then) robbers and thieves have nothing to gain

These three may help to improve the culture

but (they) are not a foundation

So let there be purpose to build on:

Look to the ordinary & embrace original nature

Diminish self-interest & have fewer desires

Simplicity

Give up sainthood, renounce knowledge,

And the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Eliminate humanity, renounce righteousness,

And people will return to filial piety and compassion.

Give up ingenuity, renounce profit,

And bandits and thieves will disappear.

These three sayings -

Regarded as a text are yet not complete.

Thus we must see to it

That they have the following appended:

Manifest plainness and embrace the genuine;

Lessen selfinterest and make your desires few,

Eliminate learning and have no undue concern.

Give up religiosity and knowledge, and the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Discard morality and righteousness, and the people will return to natural love.

Abandon shrewdness and profiteering, and there won't be any robbers or thieves.

These are external matters, however.

What is most important is what happens within: look to what is pure; hold to what is simple; let go of self-interest; temper your desires.

Separate from spirituality;

Extinguish wisdom,

And there will be benefit for all.

Discard all pretence

To piety and benevolence,

And the people will help one another.

Close the academies;

Extirpate the feudal rites,

And sorrow will be annihilated.

Banish investment vehicles,

Impoverish the profit-takers,

And there will be neither thieves nor frauds.

These are the ornaments of my teaching,

But hardly the essence, which is this:

Rely upon your inner discernment;

Return to your original purity;

Wear down your ego;

Break out of the circle of desire.

On Real Education

Do
away with learning, the same with wisdom;

the people will gain a hundredfold.

Do away with "humanity" and the same with "justice";

the people will rediscover love and duty.

Do away with expensive arts, the same with profits;

there will be no thieves, no robbers.

These three things involve the external world;

they are therefore of no real value.

Do
away with formal learning and

you will not be annoyed by its multitude of details.

How much difference between yes and yea?

How much difference between good and evil?

It is true that what men fear you must also fear,

but how very remote the actual occurrence.

The
people need what is more dependable.

Reveal, then, your natural, inner self.

Realize your original nature;

control selfishness; subdue desires.

Abandon knowledge, discard wisdom – the people will gain a hundred fold.

Abandon the humanities, discard righteousness – the people will return to filial love.

Abandon cleverness, discard gain – robbers and thieves will be no more.

These three, being considered not sufficiently aesthetic, therefore many other devices were added.

Better observe simplicity, encourage primitiveness, lessen the number of private projects, and moderate desire.

Do away with sageness and eject wisdom, and the people will be more benefited a hundred times.

Do away with learning, and grief will not be known. Do away with benevolence and eject righteousness, and the people will return to filial duty and parental love.

Do away with artifice and eject gains, and there will be no robbers and thieves.

These four, if we consider them as culture, are not sufficient.

Therefore let there be what the people can resort to: Appear in plainness and hold to simplicity; Restrain selfishness and curtail desires.

Argument for Ethical Anarchism

Terminate 'sageliness', junk 'wisdom'

the people will benefit a hundred-fold.

Terminate 'humanity', junk 'morality'

the people will respond with 'filiality' and 'affection.'

Terminate 'artistry', junk 'benefit'

thieves and robbers will lack 'existence'.

These three

taken as slogans are insufficient.

Hence, leads us to postulate that to which they belong.

Visualize simplicity and embrace uncarved wood.

Downgrade 'selfishness' and diminish 'desire.'

Terminate learning and you will lack irritation.

Let the people be free from discernment and relinquish intellection,

Then they will be many times better off.

Stop the teaching of benevolence and get rid of the claim of justice,

Then the people will love each other once more.

Cease the teaching of cleverness and give up profit,

Then there will be no more stealing and fraud.

Discernment and intellection, benevolence and justice, cleverness and profit are nothing but outward refinements.

Hence we must seek something other than these.

Reveal simplicity,

Hold to one's original nature,

Rid one's self of selfishness,

Cast away covetousness,

Eliminate artificial learning and one will be free from anxieties.

Eliminate the virtuous man, discard the wise, and the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Eliminate the goodhearted, discard justice, and the people will fulfil their filial duty with kindness.

Eliminate skilled workmen, discard profit, and the thief will not appear.

These three exist only as superficial forms.

Therefore this is the teaching to the people:

Embrace the simple,

hold the unadorned,

remove selfishness,

reduce desire.

Eliminate sageness, abandon craft,

And the people shall benefit a hundredfold;

Eliminate humanity, abandon righteousness,

And the people shall revert to filial piety and parental love;

Eliminate adroitness, abandon profit,

And robbers and thieves there shall be none.

These three remarks are considered rhetorically inadequate,

Therefore, let us put them where they belong:

"Display the undyed silk and embrace the unhewn log;

Diminish selfishness and reduce lusts;

Eliminate learning and dispense with anxiety."

Abandon learning,

And grief and sorrow will no longer be known.

Abandon learned volumes, cast off wisdom,

And people will be one hundred times better off.

Abandon righteousness, cast off justice,

And people will return to filial duty and birthing offspring.

Abandon cunning, cast off avarice,

And bandits and thieves will disappear from the earth.

These four principles, even if they form the foundation of human culture, are not sufficient.

Therefore, here are principles to which people can adhere:

Show integrity, adhere to simplicity,

Restrain selfishness, curtail lusts.

Exterminate learning and there will no longer be worries.

Exterminate
the sage, discard the wise,

And the people will benefit a hundredfold;

Exterminate benevolence, discard rectitude,

And the people will again be filial;

Exterminate ingenuity, discard profit,

And there will be no more thieves and bandits.

These
three, being false adornments, are not enough

And the people must have something to which they can attach themselves:

Exhibit the unadorned and embrace the uncarved block,

Have little thought of self and as few desires as possible.

Returning to Simplicity

Abandon your saintliness; put away your prudence; and the people will gain a hundredfold!

Abandon your benevolence; put away your justice; and the people will return to filial piety and paternal devotion.

Abandon smartness; give up greed; and thieves and robbers will no longer exist.

These are three things for which culture is insufficient. Therefore it is said:

"Hold fast to that which will endure,

Show thyself simple, preserve thee pure,

And lessen self with desires fewer."

Ideas of holiness and wisdom will hamper your progress. Ideas of morality and justice cannot replace what is written on people's hearts. The idea of profiting off others causes thieves to appear. Since these three ideas are man made, they are not eternal. Therefore they should be avoided. Patient, compassionate, and desireless, you are in step with the Tao.

Renounce saintliness, shun cleverness - let the populace be better off by a hundredfold.

Renounce nobleness, shun righteousness - let the populace return to filiality and parental love.

Renounce scheming, shun profiteering - let robbers and thieves vanish.

The three are inadequate formulation.

Better channel [the populace] to Direction.

Welcome purity, embrace simplicity;

Minimize self-interest, reduce desire.

Renounce learning, eliminate apprehension.

If you give up sagehood and abandon wisdom people will profit a hundred times over.

If you give up Humanity and abandon Duty people will return to obedience and kindness.

If you give up ingenuity and abandon profit bandits and thieves will roam no more.

But these three

are mere refinements, nowhere near enough.

They depend on something more:

observe origin's weave,

embrace uncarved simplicity,

self nearly forgotten,

desires rare.

Reject sageness and abandon knowledge,

The people will benefit a hundredfold.

Reject humanity and abandon justice,

The people will return to filial piety and parental love.

Reject cleverness and abandon profit,

Robbers and thieves will disappear.

These three are insufficient to form a doctrine.

Let there be something for the people to commit to:

Be plain and simple, and

Curtail selfishness and desires.

Break
away from sageliness, toss out wisdom

People benefit one hundred times over

Break away from humanity, toss out morality

People return to filial devotion and mothering

Break away from valuing, toss out profit

Thieves and robbers are not in existence.

These
three used as a basis for action are ornament, insufficient.

So
make present what principles?

See plainness

Embrace true nature

Reduce self-interest

Limit desires.

Reject (artificial, conventional, political) wisdom and prudence, (in order to return to primal natural uprightness). and the people will be a hundred times happier.

Reject (artificial, conventional) goodness and fairness, (filial and fraternal piety), and the people will come back (for their well-being, to natural goodness and fairness), to spontaneous filial and paternal piety.

Reject art and gain, and evildoers will disappear. (With the primordial simplicity, they will return to primordial honesty).

Renounce these three artificial categories, for the artificial is good-for-nothing.

Be attached to simplicity and naturalness. Have few personal interests, and few desires.

Discontinue sagacity, abandon knowledge

The people benefit a hundred times

Discontinue benevolence, abandon righteousness

The people return to piety and charity

Discontinue cunning, discard profit

Bandits and thieves no longer exist

These three things are superficial and insufficient

Thus this teaching has its place:

Show plainness, hold simplicity

Reduce selfishness, decrease desires

This chapter presents one of the more difficult teachings to understand, because we have a strong tendency to worship knowledge. We've all been conditioned to believe that knowledge is power, and having more can't possibly be a bad thing.

Lao Tzu is uniquely alone among all the ancient philosophers in steadfastly pointing to the pitfalls of knowledge. He saw the link between academic intelligence and scholarly arrogance clearly, and addressed it several times throughout the Tao Te Ching in no uncertain language.

One of the problems with knowledge is that we become very good at using it in a crafty and shrewd way to twist the truth. There are examples of this everywhere, and one of them applies to this very chapter.

The first two words of this chapter are literally "end sagacity." The meaning is that we should put a stop to this obsession with book smarts and focus instead on the wisdom of living an actual life apart from the books. It is the ancient Chinese equivalent of telling a bookworm to "get a life."

But some readers of the Tao Te Ching have such a powerful desire for ever more knowledge that they do not hear this message at all. They interpret "end" to mean "extreme" or "ultimate" so they can change the first line to say something completely different - that if one can gain the ultimate knowledge so that there is nothing more to learn (thus bringing about an end to learning), then people would benefit a hundredfold.

In this fashion, they have taken a warning against the disconnect of knowledge from down-to-earth living, and transformed it to a rallying cry to acquire ever more knowledge. The fact that this can happen at all is the very reason why Lao Tzu emphasizes intuitive wisdom and downplays intelligence.

As we progress through cultivation, let's keep Lao Tzu's admonition in mind: Knowledge isn't a bad thing in and of itself, but book smarts is a very different thing from street smarts... and school learning can never compare to, or supplant life learning.

RETURN TO SIMPLICITY

Abandon the show of saintliness and relinquish excessive prudence, then people will benefit a hundredfold. Abandon ostentatious benevolence and conspicuous righteousness, then people will return to the primal virtues of filial piety and parental affection. Abandon cleverness and relinquish gains, then thieves and robbers will disappear.

Here are three fundamentals on which to depend, wherein culture is insufficient. Therefore let all men hold to that which is reliable, namely, recognize simplicity, cherish purity, reduce one's possessions, diminish one's desires.

Eliminate sagacity (sheng), discard knowledge (chih),

People will be profited (li) a hundredfold.

Eliminate humanity (jen), discard righteousness (i),

People will again practice filial piety and parental love.

Abolish artistry (ch'iao), discard profit-seeking (li),

Robbers and thieves shall disappear.

These three pairs adorn (wen) what is deficient (pu tsu).

Therefore, let there be the advice:

Look to the undyed silk, hold on to the uncarved wood (p'u),

Reduce your sense of self (szu) and lessen your desires (yü).

On Real Education

Do away with learning, the same with wisdom; the people will gain a hundredfold. Do away with "humanity" and the same with"justice"; the people will rediscover love and duty. Do away with expensive arts, the same with profits; there will be no thieves, no robbers. These three things involve the external world; they are therefore of no real value.

*

The people need what is more dependable. Reveal, then, your natural, inner self. Realize your original nature; control selfishness; subdue desires.

* The first paragraph of chapter 20 was put here by the author.

Discard learning and knowledge,

and the people will be a hundred times happier.

Banish kindness and morality,

and the people will rediscover love and duty.

Forget about industry and profit,

and there won't be any thieves.

When these three things are done, more will be required:

Look at plain silk; hold uncarved wood;

let self dwindle; let desire fade.

Nineteen

Give up sainthood, renounce wisdom,

And it will be a hundred times better for everyone.

Give up kindness, renounce morality,

And men will rediscover filial piety and love.

Give
up ingenuity, renounce profit,

And bandits and thieves will disappear.

These
three are outward forms alone; they are not sufficient in themselves.

It is more important

To see the simplicity,

To realize one's true nature,

To cast off selfishness

And temper desire.

Discard cleverness and wisdom

And the people will benefit themselves a hundredfold;

Discard benevolence and rectitude

And the people will again become filial and loyal;

Discard ingenuity and profit

And theft will no longer exist.

It is not enough to have these points as governing principles,

So the people must be made subject to the following:

Keep being simple in nature and mind,

Discard selfishness and weaken desires,

Discard cultural knowledge and worries will disappear.

Banish sagehood and wisdom,

And the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Banish humaneness and righteousness,

And the people will return to filial piety and parental love.

Banish cleverness and profit,

And there will be no more thieves and robbers.

These three

I take to be insufficient as maxims.

Therefore, let them be attached to the following:

Display plainness and embrace the uncarved block,

Diminish the self and reduce desires.

If you discard sagacity and wisdom,

The populace will be better off a hundred-fold.

If you get rid of benevolence and righteousness,

Filial piety and doting affection will return.

If you dispense with ingenuity and profiteering,

There will be no thieves.

All these attributes are mere superficialities.

They are not substantial enough to run the country.

There are other ways:

Outwardly, be simple; and inwardly, you should maintain your pristine sincerity.

You should not be selfish or avaricious.

Return to Innocence

Huan Ch'un

Forswear wisdom, discard knowledge,

And the people will gain a hundredfold.

Forswear benevolence, discard righteousness,

And the people will recover filial and parental love.

Forswear skill, discard profit,

And thieves and robbers will not appear.

These three steps are inadequate for culture.

They, therefore, have to encompass some others,

Such as:

Display plainness, embrace simplicity,

Reduce selfishness, and decrease desires.

Give up holiness, cast away cleverness,

And the people will be ahundredfold better off;

Give up duty to your neighbour, cast away morality,\And the people will return to neighbourliness and family-

feeling1

Give up atsitic cleverness, cast away profit -making,

And there will be no more thieves and robbers.

But if in following thesethree precepts the people are not satisfied:

Take care that they are given things to hold on to -

Let them be shown Simplicity;

Let them hold fast to Purity.

Thus will self-seking diminish,

Thus will desirelessness be attained.

Give up wisdom, abandon knowledge,

And the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Give up benevolence, abandon righteousness,

And the people will go back to natural affection.

Give up cunning, abandon gain,

And robbers and thieves will disappear.

These external rules are not enough.

Hold to what can be counted on:

Keep to simplicity,

Grasp the primal,

Reduce the self,

And curb desire.

Abandon the separate concepts of holiness and unholiness.

Then all people will be benefitted a hundredfold.

Abandon the separate concepts of justice and humanism,

and all people will return to a natural state of harmony.

Abandon the cunning and cleverness of the mind,

and people will cease to rob and deceive one another.

These things are based on artifice and are thus inadequate to express the natural virtue of wholeness.

Hence, return to the true self to embrace only the one, unadorned nature.

Refine personal preference and desire.

End the endless search for segmented, intellectual knowledge,

and set your mind above worry and vexation.

In this way, one may restore one's unity with the perfection of one great universal life.

XIX.

Returning
to Purity

If
men would lay aside their holiness

And wisdom,
they would gain a hundred-fold,

And,
if benevolence and righteousness,

Parental
care and filial love would hold;

If
they would drop their cleverness and gain,

Robbers
would cease to trouble, as of old.

Here
are three things where decorating fails,

Let
them again embrace reality,

Let
them restore the purity of old,

Let
them return to their simplicity,

Curb
selfishness, diminish their desires,

And
in the genuine find felicity.

If the people renounce self-control and reject wisdom,

Let them gain simplicity and purity

If the people renounce duty to man and reject right conduct,

Let them return to filial piety deep, deep in the heart.

If they renounce skill and leave off search for profit,

Let them rob and by violence take possession of spiritual life.

These three things do not help our progress.

Therefore now let us seek

To perceive simplicity,

To conserve beauty in the heart,

To curb selfishness and to have few desires.

Drop
wisdom,

abandon
cleverness,

And
the people will be

benefited
a hundred fold.

Drop
humanity,

abandon
morality,

And
the people will

return
to their natural affections.

Drop
cleverness,

abandon
greed,

And
robbers and thieves

will
cease to be.

These
three are a

pattern
of Tao (the Laws of the Universe),

And
are not sufficient in themselves

they
are only symptoms.

They
should be subordinated

to
a Higher principle;

People
need

personal
remedies.

See
the simple True Self

and
embrace

your
original nature.

Forget
you habits and desires,

simplify
you life.

Abolish saintliness and reject knowledge: the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Abolish humanity and reject justice: The people will return to filial piety and maternal affection.

Abolish skill and reject profit: thieves and robbers will disappear.

(Lest) these three be considered as (mere) words which are inadequate, let there be something to hold on to.

Display natural simplicity and cling to artlessness: decrease selfishness and diminish desires.

If we could renounce our sageness and discard our wisdom, it

would be better for the people a hundredfold. If we could renounce

our benevolence and discard our righteousness, the people would again

become filial and kindly. If we could renounce our artful

contrivances and discard our (scheming for) gain, there would be no

thieves nor robbers.

Those
three methods (of government)

Thought olden ways in elegance did fail

And made these names their want of worth to veil;

But simple views, and courses plain and true

Would selfish ends and many lusts eschew.

Such ideas as "Abolish Sagehood and all other Cleverness,
and the people
will benefit a hundredfold;
Abolish humaneness and forbid any reference to
Righteousness,
and the people will again be filial and kind;
Abolish
'politics' and abandon profit,
and bandits and thieves will be no more"..

Are
'prime principles' inadequate as a civilized doctrine.
Let this be added
to them:
Celebrate
the 'plain-ness' of Gossamer;
Propagate the simplicity of an un-hewn log;

Disavow egotism,
Diminish idealisms,
Abandon absolutisms..

and there will be nothing left to worry about.

Banish
learned discourse

And everyone will be content

Eliminate propriety

Increase astonishment

Stay
away from fraud and swindle

Everyone is bound to gain

You really have it all you know

There is no basis to complain

Can
you see your empty core?

It isn't missing, gone or hidden

Just let go of neediness

And it will come unbidden

DROP wisdom, abandon cleverness,

And the people will be benefited a hundredfold.

Drop humanity, abandon justice,

And the people will return to their natural affections.

Drop shrewdness, abandon sharpness,

And robbers and thieves will cease to be.

These three are the criss-cross of Tao,

And are not sufficient in themselves.

Therefore, they should be subordinated

To a Higher principle:

See the Simple and embrace the Primal,

Diminish the self and curb the desires!

If we could discard knowledge and wisdom,

then the people would be a hundred times happier.

If we could renounce our kindness and discard our righteousness;

the people's harmonious relationships and love would form of their own accord.

If cunning and profit were renounced, stealing and fraud would disappear.

Since the above three are merely words and slogans, they are not sufficient as they are lost in the world of man.

Therefore we must look to that to which they belong:

Cultivate simplicity and be like the uncarved wooden block.

Reduce your selfishness and diminish desire and ambition.

Stop worthless learning and you will reduce vexations of the spirit.

Forget about knowledge and wisdom,

and people will be a hundred times better off.

Throw away charity and righteousness,

and people will return to brotherly love.

Throw away profit and greed,

and there won't be any thieves.

These
three are superficial and aren't enough

to keep us at the center of the circle, so we must also:

Embrace
simplicity.

Put others first.

Desire little.

Forget those clever techniques and self-improvement programs, and everyone will be better off.

Do not promise to cure people, to make people feel good, to make life sane or fair or humane. Do not offer programs that appeal to selfishness, programs that teach how to be rich, powerful, sexy - and greedy, paranoid, an manipulative.

No teacher can make you be happy, prosperous, healthy, or powerful. No rules or techniques can enforce these qualities.

If you wish to improve yourself, try silence or some other cleansing discipline that will gradually show you your true selfless self.

Forget "holiness," abandon "intelligence"

and people will be a hundred times better off.

Give up "humanitarianism," put away "righteousness"

and people will rediscover brotherly love and kindness.

Forget "great art," throw away "profit"

and there will be no more thieves.

These things are superficia and are simply not enough.

People need something solid to hold on to.

And here it is:

Be real.

Embrace simplicity.

Put others first.

Desire little.

Quit
distinguishing the wise and their wisdom,

the saints and their holiness,

and the people will be a hundred times better

off.

Quit
distinguishing morality, righteousness and

benevolence

and humanity will stay centered in its

oneness.

Abandon
the pursuit of commercial profit

and the number of thieves and robbers will be

greatly reduced.

These
are just three impediments to peace and

harmony

and abandoning them is not enough.

Peace
and harmony reside in the simplicity

of an uncarved piece of wood.

Quit
distinguishing the self and reside in oneness.

Curb your desires and aspirations

and experience the peace and harmony of

simplicity.

Renounce experts, forsake wisdom,

and people gain a hundred fold.

Renounce charity, forsake justice,

and people return to filial compassion.

Renounce cleverness, forsake profit,

and thieves and robbers disappear.

These three can not be stressed enough.

Instead, there are regulations !

Dress plainly, live simply,

with few possessions and few needs.

Give up sagacity and abandon knowledge,

And the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Give up benevolence and abandon morality,

And the people will return to natural affection.

Give up scheming and abandon gain,

And robbers and thieves will disappear.

These words in themselves are inadequate.

Therefore let the following be appended:

Exhibit plainness,

Embrace the simple,

Reduce self-interest,

Curb desire.

Advocate no sage knowledge,

And people can benefit one hundred times as much.

Advocate no public welfare,

And people will turn to good and kindly feelings again.

Advocate no art and profit,

And people will not commit theft.

Those three are just roughly relegated

And cannot be fully clarified through words:

The best policy is to strive for simplicity,

To reduce selfish desires,

And to apply no confusing knowledge.

Discard "Wisdom," throw away "Knowledge" - the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Discard "Goodness," throw away "Morality" - the people will turn back to respect and caring.

Discard "Skill," throw away "Profit" - robbers and thieves will disappear.

Taking these three lines as your text - this is not sufficient. Give them something to fasten on to:

Pay attention to the Raw, embrace the Uncarved discount your personal interests, make your desires few, doing of the will of every man would put an end to vain ambitions and desires.

When falsity and hypocrisy of this kind are removed, people will be much happier. Falsity, aspiration for wealth, theft, cruelty toward living beings — all these will disappear when people possess true knowledge. It is so because the reason for all people's vices is the lack of knowledge. It is knowledge that will show people that it is their personal interest to be simple and kind, to control the one's own worldly desires and become free from pernicious passions.

Going on the Tao Way and abandoning the human teaching,

The multitude of problems due to the temporal morality will disappear.

By giving up the justice done by laws and rules,

The natural justice will emerge.

Renouncing to profit and expensive things,

Society will get rid of thieves and robbers.

By giving up these three things,

Simplicity, naturalness and abundance will be obtained.

Extirpate
sageliness, discard wisdom, and the people will be benefitted a hundredfold.
Extirpate benevolence, discard righteousness, then the people will return to
filial piety and parental compassion. Extirpate cleverness, discard profit,
then robbers and thieves will be no more. The [foregoing] three [principles]
are inadequately ornamented, and so I cause them to have [provisional maxims]
under which they are subsumed: Display the Unbleached Fabric and embrace the
Uncarved Block. Lessen selfish interests and decrease desires. [Extirpate study
and have no worries.]

Banish sagacity; forsake wisdom.

The people will benefit a hundredfold.

Banish human-heartedness; forsake righteousness.

The people will recover filial piety and paternal affection.

Banish craftiness; forsake profit.

Thieves and robbers will no longer exist.

Those three are superficial and inadequate.

Hence the people need something to abide by:

Discern plainness.

Embrace simplicity.

Reduce selfishness.

Restrain desires.

Return to Simplicity

Discard the sacred, abandon strategies;

The people will benefit a hundredfold.

Discard philanthropy, abandon morality;

The people will return to natural love.

Discard cleverness, abandon the acquisitive;

The thieves will exist no longer.

However, if these three passages are inadequate,

Adhere to these principles:

Perceive purity;

Embrace simplicity;

Reduce self-interest;

Limit desires.

If there were no books of wisdom, books of sacrament or books of law, would there be war? Take away law and there is peace and harmony. Take away money and value and thieves will vanish. Observe like an oak and the sun will rise in the morning.

Get rid of the wise men!

Put out the professors!

Then people will profit

A hundredfold over.

Away with the kind ones;

Those righteous men too!

And let people return

To the graces of home.

Root out the artisans;

Banish the profiteers!

And bandits and robbers

Will not come to plunder.

But
if these three prove not enough

To satisfy the mind and heart,

More relevant, then, let there be

A visible simplicity of life,

Embracing unpretentious ways,

And small self-interest

And poverty of coveting.

Only when sageness and wisdom are discarded, can the people benefit;

Only when benevolence and righteousness are discarded, can the people return to filial piety and parental affection;

Only when skill and profit are discarded, can there be thieves and robbers no more.

These three (negative principles) are, however inadequate as a doctrine.

Therefore (as a positive instruction) we shall put people's understanding under this (guidance):

Manifest plainness, embrace simplicity, reduce selfishness, and hold few desires.

Repudiate sagehood and discard wisdom, and the people would benefit a hundredfold.

Repudiate benevolence and discard righteousness, and the people would again be obedient and kind to each other.

Repudiate cleverness and discard sharpness, and thieves and robbers would not exist.

As for these three pairs of terms,

Because they serve as mere decoration,

Give people the chance to identify with something else:

Exemplify simplicity, embrace the uncarved block

Curtail self-interest, and have few desires.

1. Eliminate sageliness, throw away knowledge,

2. And the people will benefit a hundredfold.

3. Eliminate humanity, throw away righteousness,

4. And the people will return to filial piety and compassion.

5. Eliminate craftiness, throw away profit,

6. Then we will have no robbers and thieves.

7.
These three sayings—

8. Regard as a text are not yet complete.

9. Thus, we must see to it that they have the following appended:

10.
Manifest plainness and embrace the genuine;

11. Lessen self-interest and make few your desires;

12. Eliminate learning and have no undue concern.

Get rid of sanctity.

People will understand the truth and be happier.

Get rid of morality.

People will respect each other and do what's right.

Get rid of value and profit.

People will not steal if they do not desire.

If that's not
possible, go to Plan B:

Be simple. Be real.

Do your work as best you can.

Don't think about what you get for it.

Stay focused. Get rid of all your crap.

.

What People Need

Abandon religion and discard cleverness,

and people will benefit a hundredfold.

Abandon humanity and discard morality,

and people will rediscover love and duty.

Abandon skill and discard profit,

and there will be no thieves or robbers.

These three things relate to externals and are inadequate.

People need what they can depend on:

reveal simplicity; embrace the natural;

control selfishness; reduce desires.

Stop your hypocritical smartness and your calculating cunning and the well-being of all creatures will increase.

Stop demanding humaneness and justice and the certainty of oneness will be furthered.

Stop catering to the lust for power and possessions and the danger of theft and loss will disappear.

These three are not attained by regulations and laws but by the return to genuineness and oneness.

Therefore: turn self-seeking into self-discipline and prove yourselves pure then selflessness becomes a matter of course.

Realize The Simple Self

Lao Tze says,

If sanctified tenets can be renounced, and craftiness given up, people will thus profit hundredfold.

If worship of benevolence can be renounced, and adoration of righteousness given up, people will resume filial piety and lenience.

If artful contrivance and scheming for gain can be given up, there will be no thieves or robbers.

These three epigrams may not be enough for guidance.

I'd bid even more as:

Sight the simplicity, arms enfold plain and true, extinguish selfish mind and eschew lust.

RETURNING TO NATURALNESS

It
is better merely to live one's life,

realizing one's potential,

rather than wishing

for sanctification.

He
who lives in filial piety and love

has no need of ethical teaching.

When
cunning and profit are renounced,

stealing and fraud will disappear.

But ethics and kindness, and even wisdom,

are insufficient in themselves.

Better
by far to see the simplicity

of raw silk's beauty

and the uncarved block;

to be one with onself,

and with one's brother.

It is better by far

to be one with the Tao,

developing selflessness,

tempering desire,

removing the wish,

but being compassionate.

Throw away holiness and wisdom,

and people will be a hundred times happier.

Throw away morality and justice,

and people will do the right thing.

Throw away industry and profit,

and there won't be any thieves.

If these three aren't enough,

just stay at the center of the circle

and let all things take their course.

Abandon sagacity and drop intelligence, the welfare of people can be increased hundredfold;

abandon benevolence and drop righteousness, the people will rejoice in filial piety and parental love;

abandon crafts and profits, robbers and thieves will cease to exist.

These three are remedies for artificial civilization.

They can never bring about satisfaction:

people should be led to, where they belong - The Nature.

He stopped research, reduced desires, sought plainness, and embraced original simplicity.

Get rid of wisdom, abandon intelligence, and

People will benefit a hundredfold.

Get rid of benevolence, abandon justice, and

People will return to filial piety and kindness.

Get rid of skill, abandon profit, and

Thieves will disappear.

These three are inadequate.

So just let things be.

Observe the plain and embrace the simple.

Do not think much and do not desire much,

Get rid of learning and worry will disappear.

XIX

Without
morality and ethics, they will thrive

Without cleverness, they will treat each other honestly

Without politeness, they will respect each other

Where you can't see how these apply, cling to their essence

Treat people simply, directly, and caringly

Eliminate Sagacity, Abandon Knowledge

Eliminate sagacity, abandon knowledge,

and the people benefit a hundredfold.

Eliminate humanitarianism, abandon duty,

and the people return to familial love.

Eliminate craft, abandon profit,

and theft will no longer exist.

These three become insufficient

when used for embellishment

causing there to be attachments.

See the basic,

embrace the unspoiled

lessen selfishness,

diminish desire.

Don't devise tricks to rule people and people will benefit enormously.

Don't artificially set the rules for family relations and people will return to their nature of loving each other.

Don't reward cleverness and profit, the robberies and the thefts will disappear.

The three measures stated above are not enough.

We must fill people's mind with frugality, honesty, selflessness, and abstinence.

Drop sagacity, abandon intellection, and the people will be benefited a hundredfold.

Drop benevolence, abandon righteousness, and the people will return to filial piety and paternal kindness.

Drop shrewdness, abandon profit, and robbers and thieves will cease to be.

These three, being external adornments, are not enough.

Therefore, there must have something to which the people attach themselves: see the pure, embrace the unadorned, diminish the self and curb the desires.

Despise sages, renounce wisdom,

it will be a hundred times better for everyone.

Despise kindness, renounce morality,

men will rediscover filial piety and love.

Despise ingenuity, renounce profit,

bandits and thieves will disappear.

As rules, these three are not sufficient.

The essence:

see the simplicity,

hold one's true nature,

cast off selfishness,

and reduce desire.

Stop being learned and your troubles will end.

Give
up wisdom, discard cleverness,

and the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Give
up benevolence, discard moral judgments, .'~

and the people will rediscover natural compassion.

Give
up shrewdness, discard gain,

and thieves and robbers will disappear.

These
three false adornments are not enough to live by.

They must give way to something more solid.

Look for what is simple and hold onto the Uncarved Block.

Diminish thoughts of self and restrain desires.

Give
up knowledge and wisdom

give up tests and degrees

and it will be a better for everyone.

Renounce kindness, morality, and justice,

and people will return to love and mercy.

Get
rid of professionalism, eliminate profit, give up luxuries,

and theft and embezzlement will disappear.

If
this advice is too complicated

then follow

simplicity

selflessness

and the lessening of desires.

Banish wisdom, discard knowledge,

Then the people will benefit a hundred times.

Banish human love, just dump righteous, moral justice,

and then the people will be dutiful and recover deep love of their kin.

Banish cunning and skill, dispel profit; dismiss utility,"

then thieves and robbers will disappear.

These three things are not enough; externals are somehow

decorations, purpose's not enough; they tend to rob life and make it too little
complicated.

Therefore let people hold well on to keeping accessories;

keeping simplicity to look at.

Go on and shield their internal soul's nature

as some ritual, raw block to hold,

their private, secret means and foster less ardent desires.

"Abolish sagehood and abandon cunning, the people will benefit a hundredfold;

Abolish humaneness and abandon righteousness, the people will once again be filial and kind;

Abolish cleverness and abandon profit, bandits and thieves will be no more."

These three statements are inadequate as a civilizing doctrine;

Therefore,

Let something be added to them:

Evince the plainness of undyed silk,

Embrace the simplicity of the unhewn log;

Lessen selfishness,

Diminish desires;

Abolish learning

and you will be without worries.

By giving up their self-righteousness and abandoning their wisdom the people would be immensely improved.

Forsaking Charity and Duty to the neighbours, they might revert to their natural relations.

Abandoning excellence and foregoing gain, the people would have no more thieves.

The cultivation of these things has been a failure, therefore they should go back whence they came.

And for you, do come forth in your natural simplicity, lay hold on verities, restrain selfishness, and rid yourself of ambition.

Happiness Is as Natural as Breathing

Do you believe that nagging each other

will bring happiness to your relationship?

Eliminate the pressure to change

and you both will find true joy.

Eliminate demands for loyalty and commitment

and true faithfulness will spring into being.

Happiness and contentment

blossom naturally in the heart that is open.

But the heart that is criticized and pressured

will close

and only the weeds of resentment

and bitterness will grow.

The bad news is that

you cannot make each other happy.

The good news is that

happiness is as natural as breathing.

Trust its presence in your hearts

and give it room to grow.

Abandon sageliness and discard wisdom; Then the people will benefit a hundredfold.

Abandon humanity and discard righteousness; Then the people will return to filial piety and deep love.

Abandon skill and discard profit; Then there will be no thieves or robbers.

However, these three things are ornaments (wen) and are not adequate.

Therefore let people hold on to these: Manifest plainness, Embrace simplicity, Reduce selfishness, Have few desires.

Rid of formalized
wisdom and learning

People would be a hundredfold happier,

Rid of conventionalized duty and honor

People would find their families dear,

Rid of legalized profiteering

People would have no thieves to fear.

These methods of life have failed, all three,

Here is the way, it seems to me:

Set people free,

As deep in their hearts they would like to be,

From private greeds

And wanton needs.

Get rid of the government and laws, and people will benefit a hundred times more.

Get rid of charity and righteousness, and people will return to the original human love.

Get rid of cleverness and materialism, and there will be no thieves and robbers.

In order to govern a country, it is not enough to just get rid of these three things;

Also let the people be simple on the outside and plain on the inside, selfless and desireless.

Abandon the relative notions of holiness and wisdom,

And people will benefit a hundred-fold.

Abandon the outer codes of benevolence and rectitude,

And people will return to natural filiality and kindness;

Abandon the unbalanced acts of cleverness and profiteering,

And there will be no robbers or thieves.

By looking within,

Evince the inner self,

Embrace the unadorned truth;

Diminish the outer self,

Demolish the phantasmic desire.

Abandon the external search for knowledge,

Abolish the internal worry for illusory matters.

Advocate no sage knowledge,

And people can benefit one hundred times as much.

Advocate no public welfare,

And people will turn to good and kindly feelings again.

Advocate no art and profit,

And people will not commit theft.

Those three are just roughly relegated

And cannot be fully clarified through words:

The best policy is to strive for simplicity,

To reduce selfish desires,

And to apply no confusing knowledge.

If we could discard knowledge and wisdom,

then the people would be a hundred times happier.

If we could renounce our kindness and discard our righteousness;

the people's harmonious relationships and love would form of their own accord.

If cunning and profit were renounced, stealing and fraud would disappear.

Since the above three are merely words and slogans, they are not sufficient as they are lost in the world of man.

Therefore we must look to that to which they belong:

Cultivate simplicity and be like the uncarved wooden block.

Reduce your selfishness and diminish desire and ambition.

Stop worthless learning and you will reduce vexations of the spirit.

