===== Chapter 6 =====

The valley spirit un-dying

Is called the mystic female.

The opening of the mystic female

Is called the root of Heaven and Earth.

It endlessly, ceaselessly seems to exist.

Use it inattentively.

The Valley Spirit never dies. It is called the Mysterious Female.

The entrance top the Mysterious Female Is called the root of Heaven and Earth.

Endless flow of inexhaustible energy.

The valley spirit never dies.

She's called a mystery, a woman.

The mystery, the gate of a woman

Is called the source of heaven and earth.

Enduring forever, she does not cease.

Drawn upon, she does not wear out.

SPIRIT OF THE VALLEY

The spirit of the valley is

Empty - Receptive - Eternal.

She is Yin - The Primal Mother.

At her door - the root of heaven and earth,

Which is continuous, without end.

Taking it, using it, drawing upon it,

It serves eternally - without fail.

The valley of the divine never dies so says the mysterious female.

The mysterious female of the gate speaks of Heaven and Earth's origin.

Soft, silky, and barely visible, her divine center is inexhaustible.

THE PERFECTING OF FORM

The Teh is the immortal enemy of the Tao, its feminine aspect. Heaven

and Earth issued from her Gate; this Gate is the Root of their World-

Sycamore. Its operation is of pure Joy and Love, and faileth never.

The Spirit of the deep never dies. It is the eternal mother: The gatewaythrough which wind The ever-protecting roots of heaven and earth. It iseternal becoming, effortless creation.

The spirit of depth never dies

People sometimes call it the Great Mother

The gate through which she breathes

Is the foundation of Creation

It appears to be everlasting

When you rely on that, life will be effortless

The tendency towards opposition is ever-present. Opposition is the source of all growth.

And the principle of opposition is the source of all opposites.

The principle of opposition is inherent in Nature, so oppositeness will continue forever, no matter how many opposites may come and go.

The Valley Spirit never dies.

It is named the Mysterious Female.

And the doorway of the Mysterious Female

Is the base from which Heaven and Earth sprang.

It is there within us all the while;

Draw upon it as you will, it never runs dry.

The urge of creation is ceaseless.

It is called the Dark Mother.

The womb of the Dark Mother

is the ground of heaven and earth.

Timeless, imperceptible,

it continues ever-present.

Endless use does not touch it.

The spirit of the valley does not die

It may be known as the mysterious feminine

The gateway of the mysterious feminine

May be known as the source of heaven and earth

Endless, continuous, seeming to exist

To practice this is not effort

The heart

The valley spirit never dies;

We call it female, the primal mother.

The gate of the mysterious female

We call it the root of Heaven and Earth.

It is like a everlasting veil, barely seen.

In being used; it is not exhausted.

The heart of Tao is immortal, the mysterious fertile mother of us all,

of heaven and earth, of every thing and not-thing.

Invisible yet ever present, you can use it forever without using it up.

The valley is ever open and alive;

It is the mother of consciousness.

In night-flower darkness

The bounty of Nature is concealed

Until, looking within, we see

The mystery extinguished, the curtain drawn

From the heart of the Mother of the Cosmos.

The concept of Yin is ever present.

It is the Mystic Female from whom

the heavens and the earth originate.

Constantly,
continuously, enduring always.

Use her!

The Valley-God never dies. She may be styled the Mother of the Abyss. The Abysmal Mother's orifice may be called the Root of the Heaven-Earth.

Continuous she is as though ever abiding, and may be employed without weariness.

'The Valley and the Spirit never die.' They form what is called the Mystic Mother,.

From whose gate comes the origin of heaven and earth.

'The Valley and the Spirit never die.' They form what is called the Mystic Mother, From whose gate comes the origin of heaven and earth. This (the origin) seems ever to endure. In use it can never be exhausted.

The Superiority of the Female

The Valley energy never dies.

This is called 'fathomless female'

The channel of the fathomless female:

This is called the basis of the cosmos.

Silken! It's as if it abides.

Handle it gently!

The spiritual reality of the void never ceases to exist.

We call it the mystery of passivity.

The entry to the mystery of passivity is the origin of the universe.

Unceasing, it always remains.

Drawn upon, it is never exhausted.

The spirit is as deep as a valley and will never fade.

It is the great mysterious mother.

The gateway of this mysterious creature is the root of Heaven and Earth.

Although it is invisible, it endures; it will never end.

The valley spirit never dies;

It is called the deep and remote female.

The gate of the deep and remote female

Is called the root of heaven and earth.

Continuous and unbroken, as if existing.

When used, it is inexhaustible.

"The valley and the wind will never die."

They are the creators of the one who is the mystical mother,

The one whose hair is the source of heaven and earth.

This source will never end.

Even if it is exploited endlessly, it will never diminish.

The spirit of the valley never dies.

This is called the mysterious female.

The gateway of the mysterious female

Is called the root of heaven and earth.

Dimly visible, it seems as if it were there,

Yet use will never drain it.

The Completion of Form

"The valley spirit not expires,

Mysterious woman 'tis called by the sires.

The mysterious woman's door, to boot,

Is called of heaven and earth the root.

Forever and aye it seems to endure

And its use is without effort sure."

The Tao is like a valley, receptive. Your true essence is the Tao, mysterious. Because it never dies it is mysterious. As it receives all we say it is feminine. From it arise all dreams. It continues without end and death cannot stop it.

The valley is undying.

It is the mystical womb.

The portal to the mystical womb is the root of the cosmos.

Continuous and unterminable, its use is inexhaustible.

The valley spirit never dies.

It's called dark female-enigma,

and the gateway of dark female-enigma

is called the root of heaven and earth,

gossamer so unceasing it seems real.

Use it: it's effortless.

The valley spirit never dies,

It is the mysterious female.

The gate of the mysterious female,

Is the root of Heaven and Earth.

It exists forever in continuum,

And using it, it is inexhaustible.

The
valley spirit has no death

It is appropriately called the all-embracing female

The
gateway of The all-embracing female

Is appropriately called the root of heavens and earth.

Continuous, soft, it looks like it exists-

It is infrequently used.

The expansive transcendent power which resides in the median space, the virtue of the Principle, does not die. It is always the same and acts the same, without diminution or cessation. This virtue is the mysterious mother of all beings.

The doorway of this mysterious mother is the root of heaven and earth, the Principle.

Sprouting forth, she does not expend herself; acting, she does not tire herself.

The valley spirit, undying

Is called the mystical female

The gateway of the mystical female

Is called the root of Heaven and Earth

It flows continuously, barely perceptible

Utilize it, it is never exhausted

The spirit of the valley - a powerful symbol of the female principle - is eternal. It has always been there and will always be. We can call it the mystical female, or the sacred feminine.

The sacred feminine is the universal source of life. Therefore, the doorway to the essence of the mystical female is what we can call the root, origin, or genesis of the entire world.

This essence - life itself - is a continuous flow. We tend to take it for granted and not pay attention to it, but it is always there. And it does not matter how much it is utilized - the power of life is literally inexhaustible.

The Spirit of the perennial spring is said to be immortal, she is called the Mysterious One. The Mysterious One is typical of the source of heaven and earth. It is continually and endlessly issuing and without effort.

The Valley Spirit (ku shen) is deathless,

It is called the Dark Mare (hsüan p'in).

The door of the Dark Mare,

Is called the root of heaven and earth.

Continuous (mien mien), it seems to exist (ts'un),

Yet in use (yung) it is inexhaustible.

The concept of Yin is ever present. It is the Mystic Female from whom the heavens and earth originate.

Constantly, continuously, enduring always.

Use her!

The valley spirit, the Great Mother:

Her doorway is the channel from which

Heaven and Earth came forth.

She is always present and inexhaustible.

Six

The valley spirit never dies;

It is the woman, primal mother.

Her gateway is the root of heaven and Earth.

It is like a veil barely seen.

Use it; it will never fail.

The Tao never dies;

It is a deep womb.

And the opening of the womb

Is called the root of heaven and earth.

It exists for ever,

And its use can never be exhausted.

The spirit of the mountain gorge never dies.

It is called the mysterious female.

The gate of the mysterious female -

It is called the root of Heaven and Earth.

Never ceasing to be, it seems as though existing forever.

Use never exhausts it.

The spirit of the valley (Dao) is immortal.

It is known as the mystical female.

The birth canal of the mystical female

Opens to the universe.

Dao seems to be able to go on forever and continues to function effortlessly.

Perfection of the Symbol

Ch'eng Hsiang

The Spirit of the Valley never dies.

Hence comes the name Mysterious Female.

The gateway of the Mysterious Female

Is the root of Heaven and Earth.

Continuous like a thread it seems to exist;

Its utility is inexhaustible.

The Spirit of the Valley is undying:

It is the Mysterious Mother.

The Doorway of the Mysterious Mother is the root from which grew Heaven and Earth.

And this Spirit endures unceasingly:

Nourishing and conserving unceasingly,

Without effort,

Itself inexhaustible.

The spirit of low places does not die.

Call its mysteriousness feminine.

The gate of this mysteriousness

Is the source of heaven-and-earth.

Unceasingly, unceasingly, it seems to persist.

Use it and it won't wear out.

The subtle essence of the universe is active.

It is like an unfailing fountain of life which flows forever in a vast and profound valley.

It is called the Primal Female and the Subtle Origin.

The Gate of the Subtle Origin becomes the root of the universe.

It subtly and gently generates without exhausting itself.

VI.

Completing
Forms

The
Spirit of the Valley never dies,

The
woman spirit of the great abyss,

From
its everlasting gate the roots of heaven and earth arise,

Who seeks
to use its power it unceasingly supplies,

Effortless,
exhaustless, and in peace.

The Spirit of the Valley dies not, it is called Mother-substance of the Deep.

The Door of Mother-substance of the Deep is called the Root of Heaven and Earth.

Continuously, continuously,

It nourishes and preserves.

Use it,

Thy strength shall not fail.

The
Spirit of

the
Valley dies not.

It
is called

the
Secret

which
is Filled with

womanly
qualities.

The
Gateway of the

Secret
is

Filled
with womanly qualities

Is
called

the
Womb of Heaven-and-Earth.

Staying
like

a
fog,

it
has only a

hint
that it is there;

And
yet when you

use
it,

it
is always there

without
end.

"The valley spirit never dies"; this refers to the dark female.

"The gate of the dark female"; this refers to the root of heaven and earth.

In fibrous ramifications it is ever present; its activity never ceases.

The valley spirit dies not, aye the same;

The female mystery thus do we name.

Its gate, from which at first they issued forth,

Is called the root from which grew heaven and earth.

Long and unbroken does its power remain,

Used gently, and without the touch of pain.

The Valley Spirit never dies-
Id is called "ANIMA; our Mystical Femininity."

The
Portal of the Mystical Female is called
"The Cave Of Impressions."
Like
gossamer, Id is seemingly insubstantial;
yet never consumed through use.

Complete
and full awareness

Is like an open valley

Of endless generation

That doesn't reach finale

It
is a simple presence

It's a nothing you can see

You'll find it right at center

Wherever you may be

THE Spirit of the Fountain dies not.

It is called the Mysterious Feminine.

The Doorway of the Mysterious Feminine

Is called the Root of Heaven-and-Earth.

Lingering like gossamer, it has only a hint of existence;

And yet when you draw upon it, it is inexhaustible.

The Tao is called the Great Mother:

empty yet never-ending,

it gives birth to unlimited worlds.

It is always at hand within you.

Use it gently, and without force.

The spirit of emptiness is immortal.

It is called the Great Mother

because it gives birth to Heaven and Earth.

It
is like a vapor,

barely seen but always present.

Use it effortlessly.

Can you learn to become open and receptive, quiet and without desires or the need to do something? Being open and receptive is called Yin, the feminine, or the valley.

Imagine that there is a pond in this valley. When no fears or desires stir the surface of the pond, the water forms a perfect mirror.

In this mirror, you can see the reflection of Tao. You can see God and you can see creation.

Go into the valley, be still, and watch the pond. Go as often as you wish. Your silence will grow. The pond will never run dry.

The valley, the pond, and Tao are all within you.

The spirit of emptiness is eternal.

It is called "the Mysterious Woman."

Her womb is called "the Source of Heaven and Earth."

Dimly seen, yet eternally present

It is always there for you to use. It's easy!

The
manifestations of Infinity never cease

manifesting.

Infinity
is the primal creator, the oneness of male

and female.

Infinity
is the gate though which heaven

and earth manifested.

It
is invisible to the senses,

yet totally permeates all things.

It
is inexhaustible and eternally available

for any purpose.

The Valley Spirit does not die, and must be the Mystic Female.

The house of the Mystic Female must be the origin of Heaven and Earth.

Diffuse and ethereal, it works without effort.

The Spirit of the Valley never dies.

It is called the Mysterious Female.1

The gate of the Mysterious Female is the source of Heaven and Earth.

Ever-abiding, always existing,

It can be used, but never exhausted.

1. presumably, the Mother of the Ten Thousand Things (which is the Tao itself). This chapter is obscure. Lau (1963, xxxviii–ix) suggests it echoes a primitive creation myth.

The totally unoccupied being never dies,

And is called the metaphysical mother.

Her door

Can be called the root of Heaven and Earth.

Uses that come in her grace are continuous,

Transcendental, and receivable with no effort.

"The Valley Spirit is undying." This is mysterious Femininity.

The Abode of mysterious Femininity: This is the Root of Heaven and Earth.

It seems to endure on and on. One who uses It never wears out.

The life and development of the Subtlest* are eternal and infinite.

It is the Deepest Base of everything.

On It the material world exists.

It acts without violence.

* Tao.

The sacred spirit doesn't die.

It can be named the subtle Mother.

It is the door of nature, residing always in us.

Used with wisdom can be enjoyed forever.

The
valley spirit does not die. It is called the dark and mysterious female. The
portal of the dark and mysterious female is called the root of heaven and earth.
It has a kind of wispy continuity as though existing. Use it without exertion.

The Valley Spirit never dies.

It is called the mystic female.

The door of the mystic female is the root of heaven and earth.

Being interminable and seeming to endure,

It can be used without toil.

Perceiving the Subtle

The mystery of the valley is immortal;

It is known as the Subtle Female.

The gateway of the Subtle Female

Is the source of Heaven and Earth.

Everlasting, endless, it appears to exist.

Its usefulness comes with no effort.

As told by the ages, everything is of the Dao. Everything is not the Dao. We are all born with it. We are all born without it. If you will use it, then use it.

The valley spirit is not dead:

They say it is the mystic female.

Her gateway is, they further say,

The base of heaven and earth.

Constantly,
and so forever,

Use her without labor.

The spirit of the valley is an immortal being,

It is called the subtle and profound female.

The gate of the subtle and profound female is the root of Heaven and Earth.

It exists formlessly,

But its utility is never won out.

The Valley Spirit never dies, and we call it the "Mysterious Female."

The gate of the Mysterious Female is referred to as the "root of Heaven and Earth."

On and on, with only apparent existence, it functions inexhaustibly.

1. The valley spirit never dies;

2. We call it the mysterious female.

3. The gates of the mysterious female—

4. These we call the roots of Heaven and Earth.

5. Subtle yet everlasting! It seems to exist.

6. In being used, it is not exhausted.

Tao is an eternal
mystery,

and everything starts with Tao.

Everybody has
Tao in them.

They just have to use it.

.

The Mystical Female

The spirit of the valley never dies.

It is called the mystical female.

The door of the mystical female

is the root of heaven and earth.

It seems to be continuously within us.

Use it, and it will never fail.

The depth of the universe is changeless.

Empty it is the Female giving birth in secret.

In motion it is the eternally flowing spring of all Becoming and all things.

Requiring no fertilization it is giving birth without ceasing.

Inexhaustible it is bringing forth abundance.

The Not Dying Secret

Lao Tze says,

The man who knows the way of nourishing his spirit shall attain immortality.

The man who has attained immortality used his nose and mouth well.

The outlet of the nose and mouth can breathe the elements,

which are the roots of the Heaven and the Earth.

In gentleness and perpetuity, he shall proceed to breathe.

By diligence and attention, he shall practice the exercise.

COMPLETION

Like
the sheltered, fertile valley,

the meditative mind is still,

yet retains its energy.

Since
both energy and stillness,

of themselves, do not have form,

it is not through the senses

that they may be found,

nor understood by intellect alone,

although, in nature, both abound.

In
the meditative state,

the mind ceases to differentiate

between existences,

and that which may or may not be.

It leaves them well alone,

for they exist,

not differentiated, but as one,

within the meditative mind.

The Tao is called the Great Mother:

empty yet inexhaustible,

it gives birth to infinite worlds.

It is always present within you.

You can use it any way you want.

The unlimited capacity of valleys;

the unbelievable power of Spirits;

and the unending life of immortality are called the Profound Origin Mother.

The beginning of the Profound Origin Mother is the root of Heaven and Earth.

Endlessly, endlessly!

It is existing.

Yet its usefulness is invisible.

Valley spirit is deathless,

It is called the mystical female.

The gateway of the mystical female,

Is called the root of heaven and earth.

Hovering, it seems ever present.

Put to use, it is never exhausted.

VI

Nature
is perpetually fertile, like a river valley

This is the feminine principle, ever capable of producing

It expresses itself in the world in uncountable ways

It is the root of all life

Subtle, so subtle, who can see it come and go?

Yet it always renews itself.

The Valley Spirit

The valley spirit not dying

is called the mysterious female.

The opening of the mysterious female

is called the root of heaven and earth.

Continuous, on the brink of existence,

to put it into practice, don't try to force it.

God of food is eternal, so it is like the mother.

The nature mother is the root of everything.

Tao is long lasting and never exhausted in application.

The never-dying spirit of the cave is called the mysterious mother.

The doorway of the mysterious mother is called the root of Heaven and Earth.

Lingering like a veil barely seen, it has only a hint of existence; and yet it is inexhaustibly used.

The valley spirit (god of agriculture), never dies, the primal mother.

Her gateway, the root of heaven and earth, seemingly presents.

Use it, never exhaust.

The valley spirit never dies.

It is the unknown first mother,

whose gate is the root

from which grew heaven and earth.

It is dimly seen, yet always present.

Draw from it all you wish;

it will never run dry.

Low-lying

human spirit

never dies

it is the eternal mystery.

The forces

of the earth

and the universe

are the doorway

to the mysterious.

It
is here

within us

always.

Use
it

it will never run dry.

The valley spirit never dies.

It's named the mystic woman.

And the gate of the profound woman is the root that heaven and earth sprang
from.

It's there within us all the while;

draw upon it as you will,

you can never wear it out.

The valley spirit never dies -

it is called "the mysterious female";

The gate of the mysterious female

is called "the root of heaven and earth."

Gossamer it is,

seemingly insubstantial,

yet never consumed through use.

Like the river in the valley, the spirit is never dried up.

I call it the Mother-Deep.

The motion of the Mother-Deep I regard as the origin of the Heaven and the Earth.

Forever it endures and moves without design.

Be Like Midwives

Your relationship is constantly giving birth

to new wonders in your soul.

It brings forth

dreams and gifts and children,

plans and hopes and accomplishments,

poems and songs and dances,

work and play and rest.

Be like midwives to each other,

bringing comfort and encouragement

to each other's labor.

What is your beloved birthing?

What are you birthing?

What is your relationship birthing?

What sort of prenatal care is needed?

What are the labor pains like?

Are there newborn fruits of your love?

What care do they need?

How can you help?

The spirit of the valley never dies. It is called the subtle and profound female.

The gate of the subtle and profound female Is the root of Heaven and Earth.

It is continuous, and seems to be always existing. Use it and you will never wear it out.

The breath of
life moves through a deathless valley

Of mysterious motherhood

Which conceives and bears the universal seed,

The seeming of a world never to end,

Breath for men to draw from as they will:

And the more they take of it, the more remains.

Nature's spirit never dies, so it is called the organ of reproducibility.

This organ functions as the root of the world.

It lasts forever and can never be used up.

The Tao, the Spirit of the Valley, is immortal.

It is called the Primordial Female.

The Gate of the Primordial Female,

Through its opening and closing,

Performs the kosmic intercourse,

And is called the origin of Heaven and Earth,

Eternally existing,

Forever tireless.

The totally unoccupied being never dies,

And is called the metaphysical mother.

Her door

Can be called the root of Heaven and Earth.

Uses that come in her grace are continuous,

Transcendental, and receivable with no effort.

The Tao is called the Great Mother:

empty yet never-ending,

it gives birth to unlimited worlds.

It is always at hand within you.

Use it gently, and without force.

