===== Chapter 13 =====

Favor and disgrace seem like a surprise.

Value great suffering as you would [keeping] your own body.

What is the meaning of "Favor and disgrace seem like a surprise"?

Favor [eventually] declines.

Getting it is like a surprise.

Losing it is like a surprise.

This is the meaning of "Favor and disgrace seem like a surprise."

What is the meaning of

"Value great suffering as you would [keeping] you own body"?

Our place, according to those who have great suffering,

Is our having a body.

When we lack bodies

What suffering do we have?

Therefore, value the "self" that's considered as being the world

As though you are able to be entrusted with the world.

Love the "self" that's considered as being the world

As though you are able to rely on the world.

Favour and disgrace are like fear. Honour and distress are like the self.

What does this mean? Favour debases us. Afraid when we get it, Afraid when we lose it.

The self embodies distress. No self, No distress.

Respect the world as your self: The world can be your lodging. Love the world as your self: The world can be your trust.

Praise and condemnation both cause dismay.

Honor and great pain are bound up together.

Why do praise and condemnation both cause dismay?

Praise makes us low.

We're dismayed when we get it.

And we're dismayed when it's taken away.

That's why praise and condemnation both cause dismay.

Why are honor and great pain bound up together?

I'm bound to be in pain because I care about myself.

If I did not care about myself, what pain could I suffer?

If you respect the world as you respect yourself

You're ready to tend the world.

If you care about the world as you care about yourself

You're ready to rule the world.

NATURE OF FEAR

Favor and glory as well as disfavor and disgrace,

All cause pain in equal measure. -

As disfavor and disgrace cause pain,

Possessing favor and glory -

The fear of its loss is ever present.

What we value and what we choose to fear

Are both contained within our body/selves.

We possess fear because we have a body/self.

Ceasing to acknowledge the body part of self,

Nothing of significance remains to be feared.

The leader -

In honoring and loving his responsibilities

as he honors and loves the body/self,

Can be entrusted with the leadership

of his domain.

Take on shame, fear, and disappointment with trepidation.

Take on your great misfortune with your body.

Why talk about shame, fear, and disappointment?

Favor acting from below.

Gain, it comes with fear.

Loss, it comes with fear.

This tells you about taking on shame, fear, and disappointment.

Why talk about your body taking on your great misfortune?

By means of the great misfortune, you are in a position for your body to emerge through reaching a state of not-self (emptiness).

You emerge.

This is why misfortune is reason to honor your body.

The action of Heaven below (the sacred body) can be trusted.

Heaven below expresses humanity through its actions

The action of Heaven below can be entrusted to Heaven below.

THE CONTEMPT FOR CIRCUMSTANCE

Favor and disgrace are equally to be shunned; honour and calamity to be

alike regarded as adhering to the personality.

What
is this which is written concerning favour and disgrace? Disgrace

is the fall from favour. He then that hath favour hath fear, and its

loss begetteth fear yet greater of a further fall. What is this which is

written concerning honour and calamity? It is this attachment to the

body which maketh calamity possible; for were one bodiless, what evil

could befall him?

Therefore
let him that regardeth himself rightly administer also a

kingdom; and let him govern it who loveth it as another man loveth

himself.

Forgiveness is to be shunned like a disgrace. Ambition for honors isa burden like the body. Forgiveness denigrates; one lives in hope to obtain,in fear of losing it. Ambition for honors is a burden like the body. Thebody is burdensome. If I had no body I would be burdenfree. Who honorsthe community as himself is worthy of her. Who loves the community as himselfmakes her his own.

Watch out for gratitude and criticism

Honour and misfortune are as disastrous as having character

What does that say?

Watch out for gratitude and criticism?

Watch out for gratitude, because it originates from submission

Watch out for criticism, because it comes from superior power

Therefore, watch out for gratitude and criticism

What does it mean that honour and misfortune are as bad as having character?

Disasters come over us because we've got something to lose

If we had nothing to lose, which disasters could still strike us?

Therefore: to him who considers himself just as worthy as the world,

Mankind can entrust the world

And to him who loves himself and the world just as unconditionally,

Mankind can entrust the care for the world

Pride and shame cause us much fearful anxiety. But our inner peace and distress should be our primary concerns.

Why do pride and shame cause us so much fearful anxiety? Because: Pride attaches undue importance to the superiority of one's status in the eyes of others; And shame is fear of humiliation at one's inferior status in the estimation of others. When one sets his heart on being highly esteemed, and achieves such rating, then he is automatically involved in fear of losing his status. Then protection of his status appears to be his most important need. And humiliation seems the worst of all evils. This is the reason why pride and shames cause us so much fearful anxiety.

Why should our inner peace and distress be our primary concerns? Because: The inner self is our true self; so in order to realize our true self, we must be willing to live without being dependent upon the opinions of others. When we are completely self-sufficient, then we can have no fear of disesteem.

He who wisely devotes himself to being self-sufficient, and therefore does not depend for his happiness upon external ratings by others, is the one best able to set an example for, and to teach and govern, others.

Favour and disgrace goad as it were to madness;

High rank hurts keenly as our bodies hurt."

What does it mean to say that favour and disgrace goad as it were to madness?

It means that when a rule's subjects get it they turn distraught,

When they lose it they turn distraught.

That is what is meant to by saying favour and disgrace goad as it were to madness.

What does it mean to say that high rank hurts keenly as our bodies hurt?

The only reason that we suffer hurt is that we have bodies;

If we had no bodies, how could we suffer?

Therefore we may accept the saying:

"He who in dealing with the empire regards his high rank

As through it were his body is the best person to be entrusted with rules;

He who in dealing with the empire loves his subjects as one should love one's body

Is the best person to whom one commit the empire."

Receive honor with dismay.

Accept misfortune gratefully.

Why receive honor with dismay?

Honor and dishonor cause the same disturbance.

With honor comes the fear of disgrace.

With disgrace comes anxiety and dread.

Why accept misfortune gratefully?

Misfortune weakens the bond to body and self.

Without a separate self, what misfortune is possible?

See misfortune as a condition of separation,

and you will become whole.

See the world as your body, and all will be delivered unto you.

Favor & disgrace are equally frightening

Exaltation and big trouble are the same as oneself

Why say that favor & disgrace are equally frightening

Favor sets up a downfall

To get it is the same as a warning

To lose it is the same as a warning

Which says that favor & disgrace are equally frightening

Why say that exaltation and big trouble

are the same as oneself?

This is the reason that we have big troubles:

Assuming that we are selves

As long as we are not selves

What troubles do we have?

And so, to respect & regard as oneself

the workings of the world

Is the same as deserving to inhabit the world

To love & regard as oneself

the workings of the world

Is the same as deserving to be steward to the world

Anxiety

Regard favor and disgrace with alarm.

Respect great distress as you do your own person.

What do I mean when I say

"Regard favor and disgrace with alarm?"

Favor is inferior.

If you get it - be alarmed!

If you lose it - be alarmed!

That is what I mean when I say

"Regard favor and disgrace with alarm."

What do I mean when I say

"Respect great distress as you do your own person?"

The reason that I have great distress

Is that I have a body

Without a body, what distress would I have?

Therefore, to one who values acting for himself

over acting on behalf of the world,

you can entrust the world.

And to one who in being parsimonious

Regards his person as equal to the world,

you can turn over the world.

Favour and disgrace are equally problematic. Hope and fear are phantoms of the body.

What does it mean the "favour and disgrace are equally problematic"? Favour lifts you up; disgrace knocks you down. Either one depends on the opinions of others and causes you to depart from your center.

What does it mean that "hope and fear are phantoms of the body"? When you regard your body as your self, hope and fear have real power over you. If you abandon the notion of body as self, hope and fear cannot touch you.

Know the universe as your self, and you can live absolutely anywhere in comfort. Love the world as your self, and you'll be able to care for it properly.

Great renown is more deadly than disgrace;

To impugn your bodily nature is self-loathing.

Fear is the blood of fame;

Your own imbalance is the fuel

Of favor-seeking and the lust for praise.

The only real misfortune

Is to look at Nature and see affliction.

When the treasure is split from its source,

Body and nature become a well of sorrow.

Cherish your bodily being;

Reconnect with the Source.

Creating and dissolving are one in the Cosmos:

Honor the life of the body, and your care will extend

To the formless Essence.

Throughout the Tao Te Ching, the error of the pursuit of fame is exposed. In this verse, Lao Tzu shows how the desire for fame arises from a view of the self and of Nature as somehow limited, stained, or at fault. To thus "look at Nature and see affliction" means that one must do something to rise above this Cosmic affliction, this inborn insufficiency of the self and the universe. Frequently this means seeking renown or other recognition according to a group norm, usually in the service of intellectual or spiritual values. In most religious and cultural ideologies, this means belittling or demonizing the body and its functions as part of one's "lower nature." This act of dividing nature, especially one's own nature, into higher and lower aspects, is to "split the treasure from its Source." It is a fundamental error of human thought, and is entirely unnecessary: our bodies are the formed expression of the Tao, the vessels of chi, the life force that pervades the Cosmos. Within the living body, cells are created, dissolved, and recreated continuously; this is the way of Nature, the way of transformation.

It is said:

Both good fortune and misfortune cause tension.

The creative and the destructive

exist equally in the mind.

How
can both good fortune and misfortune cause tension?

Those with good fortune are tense anticipating their gift;

those with misfortune are tense lamenting their loss.

How
can the creative and destructive

exist equally in the mind?

Tension exists because we have a mind,

a self, with dual purposes.

If we can be selfless, indifferent to the mind,

then tension cannot exist.

Thus,
one who views the world as he views himself

is best suited to govern the world;

one who loves humanity as he loves himself

can be entrusted with the world.

Equally fear favour and disgrace.

Regard a great calamity as you do your own body.

What is meant by "Equally fear favour and grace?" Favour should be disparaged. Gained or lost it arouses apprehension. Hence it is said, "Equally fear favour and disgrace."

What is meant by "regard a great calamity as you do your own body?" Why have I any sense of misfortune? Because I am conscious of myself. Were I not conscious of my body, what distresses would I have?

Therefore, it is only they who value their persons because of their obligation, who may be entrusted with the empire. It is only they who love themselves on account of their responsibilities, who may be charged with the care of the state.

'Favour and disgrace are like fear; fortune and disaster are like our body.'

What does it mean by 'Favour and disgrace are like fear'? Favour is in a higher place, and disgrace in a lower place. When you win them you are like being in fear, and when you lose them you are also like being in fear. So favour and disgrace are like fear.

What does it mean by 'Fortune and disaster are like our body'? We have fortune and disaster because we have a body. When we have no body, how can fortune or disaster befall us?

Therefore he who regards the world as he does the fortune of his own body can govern the world. He who loves the world as be does his own body can be entrusted with the world.

Status

Favor is as disgraceful as a warning.

Nobility is as great a trouble as a self.

Why say 'favor is as disgraceful as a warning'?

The favored is deemed below.

Receiving it is like a warning.

Losing it is like a warning.

This is called 'favor is as disgraceful as a warning.'

Why say 'nobility is as great a trouble as a self'?

Deeming I have a self is what makes it possible for me have trouble.

and if I had no self, what trouble could I have?

Hence nobility is regarding your self as the social world.

To the likes of that, the social world can be delivered.

[Nobility's] love regards the self as the social world.

To the likes of that, the social world can be entrusted.

Honor and dishonor both move us

Because we are troubled by having a self.

Why do we say that honor and dishonor move us?

Because honor lifts us upward

And dishonor lowers us downward,

Thus, when we are honored we are moved.

When we are dishonored we are also moved.

That is why honor and dishonor are both said to move us.

Why do we say that the great trouble is having a self?

Because we have great trouble simply because we have a self.

If we are selfless, then where is the trouble?

If we identify our self with the world,

Then within our self there is the world.

If we love the world as we love our self,

Then within our self there is only the world.

Accept favour and disgrace as a threat that troubles the body like a disease.

What does it mean to accept favour and disgrace as a threat?

Everyone seeks to be favoured.

No one seeks to be disgraced.

When one receives it, it causes alarm.

When one loses it, it causes alarm.

Therefore favour and disgrace are both threatening.

What does it mean that the disease troubles one's body?

One suffers from the disease because one treasures one's body.

If one does not love one's body, one will no longer suffer from the disease.

Therefore

entrust the land under Heaven to the one who does not treasure his body,

sanction the land under Heaven to the one who does not love his body.

He who does not love even his own body will not treasure rulership, and so he will truly care for all things.

"People cherish humiliations like surprises;

They treasure great calamities like their lives."

What is meant by

"People cherish humiliations like surprises"?

Humiliations are degrading,

Yet they receive one like a surprise;

Lose one like a surprise.

This is what is meant by

"People cherish humiliations like surprises."

What is meant by

"They treasure great calamities like their lives"?

The reason why I have great calamities

Is because I have my life;

If I did not have my life,

What calamities would I have?

Therefore, if you treasure governing your life

More than governing the empire,

You deserve to be entrusted with the empire;

If you grudge using your life

To govern the empire,

You deserve to be charged with the empire.

"Honor and disgrace are like fear.

Fortune and disaster are like our body."

What does "Honor and disgrace are like fear" mean?

Honor is located in a high place, and disgrace is located in a low place.

When you have them, it is as if you are in a state of fear, and when you no longer have them, it is also as if you are in a state of fear.

Therefore, honor and disgrace are like fear.

What does "Fortune and disaster are like our body" mean?

We have fortune and disaster because we have a body.

When we do not have a body, how can fortune and disaster affect us?

Therefore, the person who relates to the world like he relates to the good fortune of his body can rule the world.

The world can be safely entrusted to the person who loves it like he loves his body.

Favor and disgrace are things that startle;

High rank is, like one's body, a source of great trouble.

What
is meant by saying favor and disgrace are things that startle?

Favor when it is bestowed on a subject serves to startle as much as when it
is withdrawn.

This is what is meant by saying that favor and disgrace are things that startle.

What is meant by saying that high rank is, like one's body, a source of great
trouble?

The reason I have great trouble is that I have a body.

When I no longer have a body, what trouble have I?

Hence
he who values his body more than dominion over the empire can be entrusted with
the empire.

He who loves his body more than dominion over the empire can be given the custody
of the empire.

Loathing Shame

"Favor bodes disgrace; it is like trembling.

Rank bodes great heartache. It is like the body."

What means "Favor bodes disgrace; it is like trembling?"

Favor humiliates. Its acquisition causes trembling, its loss causes trembling. This is meant by "Favor bodes disgrace; it is like trembling."

What means "Rank bodes great heartache, it is like the body?"

I suffer great heartache because I have a body. When I have no body, what heartache remains?

Therefore who administers the empire as he takes care of his body can be entrusted with the empire.

A man hopes to be successful and fears failure. Why? Because he is someone important. Neither hope nor fear can sway a master though. Why? Because a master knows he is no one important. Free from ideas of self-importance even life and death matter not. Success and failure lose all meaning. Here, how can hope and fear touch you? Seeing all things as equal you love all things as yourself.

Receiving favor and receiving disgrace are both causes for concern,

more so than being visited by a catastrophic disease.

Why are favors and disgraces causes for concern?

Favor is beneath one.

Receiving it is a cause for concern; losing it is a cause for concern.

Why [favors and disgraces] are more a cause for concern than being visited by a catastrophic disease?

When I have a catastrophic disease,

it is inflicted upon my body.

When I am beyond my body, how can I be visited by diseases?

Thus,

when one values one's body for the good of the world,

one may be consigned with the world's care.

When one treasures one's body for the good of the world,

one may be vested with the world's care.

Honor is a contagion deep as fear, renown a calamity profound as self.

Why do I call honor a contagion deep as fear?

Honor always dwindles away, so earning it fills us with fear and losing it fills us with fear.

And why do I call renown a calamity profound as self?

We only know calamity because we have these selves.

If we didn't have selves what calamity could touch us?

When all beneath heaven is your self in renown you trust yourself to all beneath heaven,

and when all beneath heaven is your self in love you dwell throughout all beneath heaven.

Exceptional favour or disgrace causes anxieties.

Treat calamities as treats to your body.

What is meant by "exceptional favour or disgrace causes anxieties"?

Exceptional favour is granted to someone of low status:

Whoever receives it is anxious about what is expected of him;

Whoever loses it is anxious about the accompanying disgrace.

This explains "exceptional favour or disgrace cause anxieties".

What is meant by "treat calamities as threats to your body"?

The reason I encounter calamities is that I have e a body.

If I no longer have a body, what calamity do I have?

Therefore,

He who values the world as his self merits the confidence of the world;

He who loves the world as his self deserves the trust of the world.

Favor
and disgrace look alarming.

The treasure of great danger looks like the body.

Why
say favor and disgrace look alarming?

Favor acts superior

Disgrace acts inferior

Being obtained it looks alarming

Being lost it looks alarming

Appropriately say favor and disgrace look alarming.

Why
say the treasure of great danger looks like the body?

I place the occurrence of things of great danger

As action of I in the presence of a body.

I reach the absence of a body

I am present with what danger?

Appropriately say the treasure of great danger looks like the body.

So
treasuring it when the body acts in the world

It looks like one can be committed to the world.

Being fond of it when the body acts in the world

It looks like one can be entrusted to the world.

Favour, because it can be lost, is a source of worry. Greatness, because it can be ruined, is a source of fear.

What do these two sentences mean? The first means that the care required to keep in favour, and the fear of losing it, fill the mind with worry.

The second points out that ruin generally comes from caring too much for one's own greatness. He who has no personal ambition does not have to fear ruin.

He who is only concerned about the greatness of the empire (and not that of himself), he who only desires the good of the empire (and not his own good), to him the empire should be confided (and it would be in good hands).

Favor and disgrace make one fearful

The greatest misfortune is the self

What does "favor and disgrace make one fearful" mean?

Favor is high, disgrace is low

Having it makes one fearful

Losing it makes one fearful

This is "favor and disgrace make one fearful"

What does "the greatest misfortune is the self" mean?

The reason I have great misfortune

Is that I have the self

If I have no self

What misfortune do I have?

So one who values the self as the world

Can be given the world

One who loves the self as the world

Can be entrusted with the world

Both favor and disgrace make us fearful and apprehensive.

The greatest source of adversity and trouble is the ego - the sense of self-importance.

What do we mean when we say that both favor and disgrace make us fearful? Favor is exalted, while disgrace is lowly and despised. We are afraid of getting humiliation. At the same time, we are also afraid of losing recognition. This is why we say both favor and disgrace make us fearful.

What do we mean when we say that the greatest source of trouble is our ego? The reason I've got problems is that my ego gets in the way. If I didn't have this sense of self-importance, what trouble could I possibly have?

Therefore, the humble sage who values the world as much as the self, is the one that can do the world justice. The selfless sage who loves the world as much as the self, is the one that we can trust with great responsibilities.

LOATHING SHAME

Favor and disgrace are alike to be feared, just as too great care or anxiety are bad for the body.

Why are favor and disgrace alike to be feared? To be favored is humiliating; to obtain it is as much to be dreaded as to lose it. To lose favor is to be in disgrace and of course is to be dreaded.

Why are excessive care and great anxiety alike bad for one? The very reason I have anxiety is because I have a body. If I have not body why would I be anxious?

Therefore if he who administers the empire, esteems it as his own body, then he is worthy to be trusted with the empire.

Accept honors and disgraces as surprises,

Treasure great misfortunes as the body.

Why say: "Accept honors and disgraces as surprises"?

Honors elevate (shang),

Disgraces depress (hsia).

One receives them surprised,

Loses them surprised.

Thus: "Accept honors and disgraces as surprises."

Why say: "Treasure great misfortunes as the body"?

I have great misfortunes,

Because I have a body.

If I don't have a body,

What misfortunes do I have?

Therefore treasure the body as the world,

As if the body can be entrusted to the world.

Love the body as the world,

As if the body can be entrusted to the world.

It is said: "Both good fortune and misfortune cause tension. The creative and the destructive exist equally in the mind."

What is ment by "Good fortune and misfortune cause tension"? Those with good fortune are tense anticipating their gift; those with misfortune are tense lamenting their loss.

What is ment by "The creative and the destructive exist equally in the mind"? Tension exists because we have a mind, a self, with dual purposes. If we can be selfless, indifferent to the mind, how then can tension exist?

Thus, one who views the world as he views himself is best suited to govern the world; one who loves humanity as he loves himself can be entrusted with the world.

Being in favor or being in disgrace: either way, trouble.

It is all within the Self.

What does this mean?

Being in favor, we fear falling out of favor.

Being out of favor, we fear remaining there.

This fear is within the Self.

No Self, no fear.

Do you value the world as you value yourself?

You may be trusted to rule.

Do you love the world as you love yourself?

The world may be entrusted to your care.

Thirteen

Accept disgrace willingly.

Accept misfortune as the human condition.

What do you mean by "Accept disgrace willingly"?

Accept being unimportant.

Do not be concerned with loss or gain.

This is called "accepting disgrace willingly."

What
do you mean by "Accept misfortune as the human condition"?

Misfortune comes from having a body.

Without a body, how could there be misfortune?

Surrender
yourself humbly; then you can be trusted to care for all things.

Love the world as your own self; then you can truly care for all things.

Honor and disgrace are both startling.

It is like cherishing great trouble (vanity) as one's life and body.

What is meant by saying that honor and disgrace are startling?

Honor itself, though mean, gives pleasant surprise to those who obtain it

As well as startles them when they lose it.

What is meant by saying that it is like cherishing great trouble as one's life and body?

Because my life and body is the very source of great trouble.

If I have no body and life,

What trouble can I suffer?

Thus he who can value the empire as he values his own life and body

Can be entrusted with the care of the empire.

Thus he who can cherish the empire as he cherishes his own life and body

Can be entrusted with the care of the empire.

"Be alarmed by favor and disgrace;

High rank brings you great misfortune, as if your own body."

What is the meaning of "Be alarmed by favor and disgrace"?

Regard favor as low.

Be alarmed to receive it;

Be alarmed to lose it.

This is the meaning of "Be alarmed by favor and disgrace."

What is the meaning of "High rank brings you great misfortune, as if your own body"?

My reason for having great misfortune

Is my having a body.

If I had no body,

What misfortune would I have?

Therefore, if a man values the care of his body above ruling all under Heaven,

He may be given all under Heaven.

If a man cherishes his body more than ruling all under Heaven,

All under Heaven may be entrusted to him.

Whether you are exalted or disgraced, you are uneasy.

It is because you are fearful of imminent disaster.

Why should you be uneasy when you are exalted or disgraced?

Being exalted, you feel proud and elated.

In disgrace, you feel shameful and miserable.

Gaining honour, you fear losing it.

Losing honour, you suffer severe humiliation.

This is why you feel terribly uneasy when you are exalted or disgraced.

Why is there a fear of imminent disaster?

The fear exists because you are constantly worrying about when disaster will strike you.

If you can forget about yourself, then there is no fear.

However, if you manage the country with the same consideration as you have for yourself,

Then you can be entrusted for the job.

If you rule the country in the same manner as you love yourself,

You deserve to be the trustee of the nation.

Abhorrence of shame

Yen Ch'ih

Favor and disgrace both seem startling.

Honor is great trouble if identified with the self.

What does it mean by saying

That favor and disgrace both seem startling?

Favor descends from superior to inferior.

The recipient seems startled upon getting it;

He seems no less startled upon losing it.

This is what it means by saying

That favor and disgrace both seem startling.

What does it mean by saying

That honor is great trouble if identified with the self?

The reason why I have great trouble

Is that I have a self;

If I am selfless and unselfish,

What trouble do I have?

Therefore, he who feels honored

In offering himself for the world,

Can be assigned the rule of the world;

He who loves to offer himself for the world,

Can be trusted with the world.

"Glory and disgrace are both related to fear;

Fortune and misfortune are both bound up with the body."

What is meant by the saying that glory and disgrace are both related to fear?

The on eis high, the other is low.

If you achieve glory, you fear to lose it.

If you are in disgrace, you fear the hsame of it.

Thus glory and disgrace both involve fear.

What is meant by the saying that fortune and misfortune are bound up with the body?

Fortune and misfortune come to us because we have a body.

If we had no body, how should fortune or misfortune befall us?

Therefore he who is willing to give to the world as much care as he gives to his own body is worthy to govern the

world.

He who gives to the world as much love as he gives to his own body, may be trusted with the ruling of the world.

Favor and disgrace: same fear.

Honor and distress: same self.

What is meant by

"Favor and disgrace: same fear"?

Favor make the lowly

Fearful when they get it,

Fearful when they lose it.

That's why favor and disgrace are the same fear.

What is meant by

"Honor and distress: same self"?

The self registers our distress:

If we have no self,

We have no distress.

Therefore,

He who values all things as his self

Is fit to manage all things.

He who loves all things as his self

Is fit to be trusted with all things.

Favor and disgrace are both causes of shock.

When one is favored, one is shocked.

When one is disgraced, one is also shocked.

That is because people forget the unadorned plainness of universal life.

If they knew this clearly, then what is meant by saying that favor and disgrace are both causes of shock?

Favor is no higher than disgrace.

What is meant by saying that the greatest trouble is the strong sense of individual self that people carry in all circumstances?

People are beset with great trouble because they define their lives so narrowly.

If they forsake their narrow sense of self and live wholly, then what can they call trouble?

Therefore, only one who dedicates himself to the wholeness of the world is fit to tend the world.

Only one who relinquishes the self can be entrusted with responsibility for the life of the world.

XIII.

Rejecting
Shame

Like
fear are favor and disgrace,

On
others they depend for place,

But
honor and great sacrifice

To
one s own body we can trace.

Like
favor and disgrace is fear,

Why
should they thus akin appear?

Favor
makes one stoop and cringe,

And,
when obtained, tis held in fear

And losing
it, remains disgrace,

And
fear again presents its face,

And
that is why, with fear tis said

Disgrace
and favor have their place.

But
honor and great sacrifice,

Why
do these two appear in guise

Of
body? Just because the self

Of my
own body these comprise.

They
make me have a body, then,

To
know my honor, feel my pain,

And
when I count it nothingness

What
sacrifice can I sustain?

When
one, for honor s self alone,

Imperial
rule would make his own,

He
can thereby be safely used

To
rule the realm and hold the throne.

When
one, for love, himself will share,

And
all self-sacrifice will bear,

The
rule of all beneath the sky

Can
be entrusted to his care.

Dread glory as you dread shame.

Prize great calamity as you prize your body.

What does this mean:

"Dread glory as you dread shame"?

Glory comes from below.

Obtain it, you are afraid of shame;

Lose it, you are still afraid of shame.

That is why it is said;

"Dread glory as you dread shame."

What does this mean:

"Prize great calamity as you prize your own body"?

We who meet with great calamities, meet them because we have a body.

If we had not a body what calamity could reach us?

Therefore he who honours the kingdom as his body can govern the kingdom.

He who loves the kingdom as his own body can be trusted with the kingdom.

"Welcome
disgrace

as
a pleasant surprise.

Prize
misfortunes

as
your own body."

Why
should we

"welcome
disgrace

as
a pleasant surprise"?

Because
a lowly state is a boon:

Getting
it is a pleasant surprise,

And
so is losing it!

That
is why we should

"welcome
disgrace

as
a pleasant surprise."

Why
should we

"prize
misfortunes

as
our own body"?

Because
our body

is
the very source

of
our misfortunes

.
If we have no body,

what
misfortunes

can
we have?

Only
he

who
is willing to

give
their body

for
the sake of the world

is
fit to be

entrusted

with
the world.

Only
they

who
can do it

with
love

and
regard themselves

as
the world

are
worthy of being

the
steward of the world.

This
lesson is known

by
all Complete Thinkers.

Favour and disgrace are both like goads; value great disasters as your body.

What is the meaning of: "Favour and disgrace are both like goads"?

Favour is high, disgrace is low; to attain is like a goad; to fail is like a god. That is the meaning of: "Favour and disgrace are both like goads".

What is the meaning of: "value great disasters as your body"?

The reason that I suffer great disasters, is that I have a body.

As soon as I have no body, what disaster can I suffer?

Therefore, he who rules All-under-heaven as he values his own body, may well be entrusted with All-under-heaven; he who rules All-under-heaven as he loves his body, may well be entrusted with All-under-heaven.

Favour and disgrace would seem equally to be feared; honour and

great calamity, to be regarded as personal conditions (of the same

kind).

What
is meant by speaking thus of favour and disgrace? Disgrace is

being in a low position (after the enjoyment of favour). The getting

that (favour) leads to the apprehension (of losing it), and the losing

it leads to the fear of (still greater calamity):--this is what is

meant by saying that favour and disgrace would seem equally to be

feared.

And
what is meant by saying that honour and great calamity are to be

(similarly) regarded as personal conditions? What makes me liable to

great calamity is my having the body (which I call myself); if I had

not the body, what great calamity could come to me?

Therefore
he who would administer the kingdom, honouring it as he

honours his own person, may be employed to govern it, and he who would

administer it with the love which he bears to his own person may be

entrusted with it.

Being 'favored' is a shocking disgrace.
Being 'honored' is as great
an affliction as the body.
If
one were never 'favored' disgrace could not touch you.
If one were not embodied,
there could be neither 'honor' nor affliction.
Therefore,
when one merely minds one's own affairs
rather than 'taking care of the universe'

the universe may be entrusted to you;
and when one does not afflict
oneself while 'taking care of the universe'
then a universe can be
safely delivered over to you.

Fame
and shame are equal

And so are gain and loss

It isn't very difficult

To get this point across

Having
fame you know that you

Are terrified to lose it

Making gain you always fear

That others will abuse it

Can
you see that you're not like

Your image or reflection?

Just see you are totality

By looking in your own direction

The
one who is not limited

Accepts whatever comes or goes

And cares for everything around

On opening and close

"WELCOME disgrace as a pleasant surprise.

Prize calamities as your own body."

Why should we "welcome disgrace as a pleasant surprise"?

Because a lowly state is a boon:

Getting it is a pleasant surprise,

And so is losing it!

That is why we should "welcome disgrace as a pleasant surprise."

Why should we "prize calamities as our own body"?

Because our body is the very source of our calamities.

If we have no body, what calamities can we have?

Hence, only he who is willing to give his body for the sake of the world is fit to be entrusted with the world.

Only he who can do it with love is worthy of being the steward of the world.

Success is as dangerous as failure.

Hope is as hollow as fear.

What does it mean that success is a dangerous as failure?

Perceptions of success and failure both arise from concern for the self.

What does it mean that hope is as hollow as fear?

Hope and fear are both phantoms,

they also arise from thinking of the self.

When we don't see the self as self,

what do we have to fear?

Therefore, if you dedicate your life to the benefit of the world,

you can rely on the world.

To the likes of this, the world can be entrusted.

Success is as dangerous as failure,

and we are often our own worst enemy.

What
does it mean that success is as dangerous as failure?

He who is superior is also someone's subordinate.

Receiving favor and losing it both cause alarm.

That is what is meant by success is as dangerous as failure.

What does it mean that we are often our own worst enemy?

The reason I have an enemy is because I have "self".

If I no longer had a "self", I would no longer have an enemy.

Love
the whole world as if it were your self;

then you will truly care for all things.

If you measure success in terms of praise and criticism, your anxiety will be endless.

Having a good reputation or becoming well-known for your work can be a hindrance to your further development.

Fame is as burdensome as caring for yourself properly.

What is the problem with praise and criticism?

If the group applauds one thing you do, and then you feel good, you will worry if they do not applaud as loudly the next time. If they are critical, if they argue or complain, you will feel hurt. Either way, you are anxious and dependent.

How can a good reputation be a hindrance?

A good reputation naturally arises from doing good work. But if you try to cherish your reputation, if you try to preserve it, you lose the freedom and honesty necessary for further development.

How is fame like caring for yourself?

In order to do good work, you must take good care of yourself. You must value yourself and allow others to value you also. But if you make too much of yourself, you will become egocentric. Egocentricity injures both self and work.

If you can live with the fruits of success and care for yourself properly, you will be able to foster success in other people.

Success is often as unsettling as failure.

The world's troubles are no more important

Than the well-being of your own body.

Why do I say, "Success is often as unsettling as failure?"

Success strikes us deep.

It shakes us up to get it.

It shakes us up to lose it.

Thus, success is really little different than failure,

For both are unsettling.

Why do I say, "The World's greatest troubles are no more important

than the well-being of your own body?"

The reason I think I have troubles

Is because I have materia existence.

If I had no body, what troubles could I possibly have?

What we must do is see the whole world as our "Self."

Only then will we be worthy

Of being entrusted with the World.

Only One who values the World as his own body

can truly rely on the World in return.

Accept
disgrace indifferently.

Acknowledge misfortune as one of the human

conditions.

What
does it mean to "accept disgrace

indifferently"?

Honor and disgrace are one in the Infinite.

Only by making distinctions does one

manifest disgrace.

Refusing to make distinctions

merges honor and disgrace into the

oneness of circumstances

which creates harmony.

What
is meant by "acknowledging misfortune

as one of the human conditions"?

The
body is a manifestation of Infinity

and the body is subject to being

affected by the other manifestations

of Infinity.

Misfortune is one of those other

manifestations.

However,
as with disgrace,

refusing to distinguish misfortune and

fortune

creates indifference which keeps one

focused

on the oneness of Infinity

and creates peace in the self.

Stay
centered in

your oneness with Infinity

and you can be entrusted with leadership.

See
the world as yourself

and you will care for all things.

Favor and Disgrace are both alarming.

Possessions are a great concern to one's Self.

Why say that 'Favor and Disgrace are both alarming' ?

Favor does not appear alarming, but loss of Favor is alarming.

This means that both Favor and Disgrace are alarming.

Why say that 'Possessions are a great concern to one's Self' ?

Whatever I own causes great worry, and affects my Self.

Compared to non-Self, what a great concern is Self.

Therefore, Self is governed by Possessions, rather than Heaven,

and can not be delivered to Heaven.

Self is governed by (self-) Love, rather than Heaven,

and can not be entrusted to Heaven.

Favour and disgrace equally cause apprehension.

Fortune and misfortune have their origin in our own bodies.

What is meant by saying that favour and disgrace equally cause apprehension?

Favour is for inferior people:

Being favoured leads to the apprehension of losing favour,

And losing it leads to the fear of greater misfortune.

This means that favour and disgrace equally cause apprehension.

What is meant by saying that fortune and misfortune have their origin in our own bodies?

Having a body, I am liable to misfortune;

If I had no body, what misfortune could I suffer?

Therefore, he who values the world as much as his own body

Is fit to rule the empire.

And he who loves the world as much as his own body

May be entrusted to care for all beneath Heaven.

Favor is invited and disgrace is feared,

As if they are a disastrous matter of life and death.

One is surprised when favor is bestowed.

One is again surprised when favor is lost

Or when one is afflicted with disgrace.

But why could they mean so much to us?

I would say I can have disasters

Only because I treasure my own life too much.

But if I live beyond my physical existence,

What disaster can matter to me?

Therefore, we should value our own life only to the extent

That we are supporting the world,

And love our physical existence only to the extent

That the world has been entrusted to us.

"Favour and disgrace: this means being upset high rank does great damage to your self."

What does it mean, "favour and disgrace: this means being upset"? Favour is degrading: Gaining it you will be upset losing it you will be upset This is what it means, "favour and disgrace: this means being upset."

What does it mean, "high rank does great damage to your self"? What is the source of the great damage done me? It is because I have a self If I had no self what damage could be done me? This is what it means, "high rank does great damage to your self."

Yes: A valuing of one's self that regards the self the same as the world - this means one can be entrusted with the world. A loving of one's self that regards the self the same as the world - this means one can be given the world.

Glory and disgrace are equally feared of. Fame is a great distress in life.

What does it mean that glory and disgrace are equally feared of? It means that people fight for glory and then fear to lose it.

And what does it mean that fame is a great distress in life? It means that I suffer a great distress because I treasure my name.

When I cease treasuring my name, I will have no distress.

Thus, the wise does not seek praising himself. He just serves people self-sacrificingly. Therefore, he can live among people in peace. He does not fight with anyone for something — therefore he is invincible.

Both success and failure generate fear.

Good though or bad thought bring that duality

Which is present all the time in the strained mind.

How
success or failure creates fear?

The lucky one waits his win with impatience,

The one who failed is unsettled because of his loss.

How
a good thought or a bad thought,

Is present in the strained mind?

It is because we have an Ego.

If we don't pay much attention to own Ego,

The strained mind is much relaxed.

Thus,
he who sees others, like he sees himself

Is worthy to be a leader.

He who love others like himself

Is worthy of trust.

Favor
and disgrace [both] produce alarm. A source of great travail is one's self.
What is meant by saying "Favor and disgrace produce alarm?'' He who is favored
is someone's inferior. Receiving favor and losing it both cause alarm. That
is what is meant by saying that "Favor and disgrace produce alarm.'' What is
meant by saying "A source of great travail is one's self?'' The reason I [can]
have a great travail is that I have a self. Should I no longer have a self then
what travail could there be? So those who take their selves as more valuable
than ruling the world may be given custody of the world. Those who love themselves
more than ruling the world may be entrusted with the world.

Favor and disgrace are likely to cause fear.

Highly respect great trouble as one respects his own body.

What is meant by "favor and disgrace are likely to cause fear"?

Favor is for the inferior:

Obtaining it, one will fear it.

Losing it, one will fear it.

This means that "favor and disgrace are likely to cause fear."

What is meant by "highly respecting great trouble as one respects his own body"?

"I have great trouble because I have a body;

When I no longer have a body, how can I have trouble?"

Therefore, one who respects himself for the world can be lodged with it;

One who loves himself for the world can be entrusted with it.

Expanding Identification

There is alarm in both favor and disgrace.

Esteem and fear are identified with the self.

What is the meaning of "alarm in both favor and disgrace?"

Favor ascends; disgrace descends.

To attain them brings alarm.

To lose them brings alarm.

That is the meaning of "alarm in both favor and disgrace."

What is the meaning of "esteem and fear are identified with the self?"

The reason for our fear

Is the presence of our self

When we are selfless,

What is there to fear?

Therefore those who esteem the world as self

Will be committed to the world.

Those who love the world as self

Will be entrusted with the world.

You are in everything. Everything is in you. Create hope and fear and you throw away the Dao. Create happiness and sorrow and you will collapse. Keep your feet on the ground. Love everything as you love yourself. Then everything is within your reach.

"Favor, like disgrace

Brings trouble with it;

High rank, like self,

Involves acute distress."

What
does that mean, to say

That "favor, like disgrace

Brings trouble with it"?

When favor is bestowed

On one of low degree,

Trouble
will come with it.

The loss of favor too

Means trouble for that man.

This, then, is what is meant

By "favor, like disgrace

Brings trouble with it."

What
does it mean, to say

That "rank, like self,

Involves acute distress"?

I suffer most because

Of me and selfishness.

If I were selfless, then

What suffering would I bear?

In
governing the world,

Let rule entrusted be

To him who treats his rank

As if it were his soul;

World sovereignty can be

Committed to that man

Who loves all people

As he loves himself.

(People) love vanity so much as to be easily alarmed,

And they consider the great trouble (vanity) as precious as their lives.

What does it mean "to love vanity so much as to be easily alarmed"?

Vanity is inferior in itself.

(And yet people) are pleasantly surprised when they receive it,

And also frightened when they lose it.

This is what it means "to love vanity so much as to be easily alarmed."

What does it mean "to consider the great trouble as precious as their lives"?

The reason that I have the great trouble (vanity) is that I have a body.

If I have no body,

What trouble could I have?

Therefore only those who value themselves above the world can undertake its important tasks.

Only those who love themselves above the world can be entrusted with its important tasks.

Favor and disgrace are enough cause for alarm, and self-importance is a great calamity that can cost one his person.

What is meant by "favor and disgrace are enough cause for alarm"?

Favor, when it is had by an inferior, is as alarming as when it is lost by him.

This is what is meant by "favor and disgrace are enough cause for alarm."

What is meant by self-importance being "a great calamity that can cost one his person"?

The reason I suffer such a great calamity is that I am bound by my own person.

When I am no longer bound by my own person,

What calamity could befall me?

Therefore, because such a one values his own person as much as anything under Heaven, he may be entrusted with all under Heaven.

Because such a one cherishes his own person as much as anything under Heaven, he may have all under Heaven rendered to his care.

1. "Regard favor and disgrace with alarm."

2. "Respect great distress as you do your own person."

3. What do I mean I say "Regard favor and disgrace with alarm"?

4. Favor is inferior.

5. If you get it—be alarmed!

6. If you lose it—be alarmed!

7. This is what I mean when I say "Regard favor and disgrace with alarm."

8. What do I mean when I say "Respect great distress as you do your won person"?

9. The reason why I have distress

10. Is that I have a body.

11. If I had no body, what distress would I have?

12. Therefore, to one who values acting for himself over acting on behalf of
the world,

13. You can entrust the world.

14. And to one who in being parsimonious regards his person as equal to the
world,

15. You can turn over the world.

Winning can
be just as bad as losing.

Confidence can mess you up just as much as fear.

What does "winning
can be just as bad as losing" mean?

If you're down, you might be able to get up.

But if you're up, you can get knocked down real fast.

Don't worry about the score,

just do what you have to do.

What does "confidence
can mess you up just as much as fear" mean?

Fear can keep you from getting the job done,

but confidence can get you in over your head.

Walk tall, but don't get cocky.

Know your limits,
and nothing can ever hold you back.

Deal with what you can, and the rest will follow.

.

Selflessness

Good fortune and misfortune cause apprehension.

Regard great trouble as you regard your self.

What is meant by

"Good fortune and misfortune cause apprehension?"

Those with good fortune are apprehensive of their gain.

Those with misfortune are apprehensive of their loss.

What is meant by

"Regard great trouble as you regard your self?"

Great trouble comes from being selfish.

Being selfless, what trouble is there?

Therefore those who value the world as themselves

may be entrusted to govern the world.

Those who love the world as themselves

may be entrusted to care for the world.

Fame and shame are equally laden with grief

Good luck and bad luck resemble man's ego.

What does this mean?

Acquire fame and you dread its loss

Lose fame and you are scared of shame.

Both are accompanied by fear both are sources of grief.

Likewise:

Good luck and bad luck arise from man's ego hit man's ego accompany man's ego.

That is why freedom from ego means freedom from fame as well as shame from good luck as well as bad luck freedom from grief.

For I-ness means limitation means to be chained to grief and bound to the world

All-ness is oneness with the limitless is superiority over grief and overcoming of the world.

Honor And Disgrace

Lao Tze says,

Honor and disgrace alike give rise to fear,

because this is the fear that the great calamity might fall upon the corporeal self.

What is honor?

And what is disgrace?

Honor means that he who was low before has been promoted.

Since he has been promoted, he is afraid of losing his promotion, which is disgrace.

Thus he who has been promoted lives in fear that he may be degraded.

And he who has been degraded is haunted by the dread that his degradation may last forever.

That is why honor and disgrace alike give rise to fear.

What is the meaning of fearing the great calamity coming upon the corporeal self?

How we can sense that the great calamity is due to the fact that we inherit corporeal self.

If we don't inherit the corporeal self, what kind of calamity can afflict us?

Therefore,

one who has regard for his personal health is more important than he who governs the world, and is eligible to be trusted with the world;

one who loves himself should be put before he who governs the world, and is qualified to be handed over the world.

UNMOVED AND UNMOVING

The
ordinary man seeks honour, not dishonour,

cherishing success and abominating failure,

loving life, whilst fearing death.

The sage does not recognise these things,

so lives his life quite simply.

The
ordinary man seeks to make himself

the centre of his universe;

the universe of the sage is at his centre.

He loves the world, and thus remains unmoved

by things with which others are concerned.

He acts with humility, is neither moved nor moving,

and can therefore be trusted in caring for all things.

Success is as dangerous as failure.

Hope is as hollow as fear.

What does it mean that success is a dangerous as
failure?

Whether you go up the ladder or down it,

you position is shaky.

When you stand with your two feet on the ground,

you will always keep your balance.

What does it mean that hope is as hollow
as fear?

Hope and fear are both phantoms

that arise from thinking of the self.

When we don't see the self as self,

what do we have to fear?

See the world as your self.

Have faith in the way things are.

Love the world as your self;

then you can care for all things.

Yet, honor and dishonor cause the same excitement.

Pleasure and worry affect the same body.

What does it mean by "honor and dishonor cause the same excitement"?

People look up to honor and look down upon dishonor.

They are excited when they get the honor;

they also are excited when they lose the honor.

What does it mean by "the great worry of man is because of love for self"?

The reason that we have worry is because we have ourselves.

If we could forget ourselves, what else remains to be our worry?

Hence, if one loves the world as much as himself, he may be able to rule the world.

If one treasures the world as much as himself, he may be trusted with the world.

Favor and disgrace surprise the most.

Value the trouble as you do the body.

Why do "favor and disgrace surprise the most"?

Favor enhances only the inferior,

Receiving it is a surprise,

And losing it is also a surprise.

This is why "favor and disgrace surprise the most."

Why to "value the trouble as you do the body"?

It is only because I have a body that I have trouble.

If I did not have a body, where would the trouble be?

So, if you value the world as you do the body,

You can be entrusted with the world;

If you love the body as you love the beauty of the world,

You can be responsible for the world.

XIII

Status
is a cold, damp wind to the spirit

It can lead to fevers

The more status you gain, the more afraid you are to lose it

The more you lose, the more afraid you are to show your face

And this fear is like any other sickness; it limits you

It debilitates you and risks being spread to others

To
earn the trust of a society you must care for its health

And so you must guard yourself against the ill effects of status

Care for the spirit of society as you would for the health of your body

Whoever can do that, is worthy to lead

Favor and Disgrace

Favor and disgrace seem alarming;

high status greatly afflicts your person.

What are favor and disgrace?

Favor is the lower:

get it and you're surprised,

lose it and you're startled.

This means favor and disgrace are alarming.

Why does high status greatly afflict your person?

The reason we have a lot of trouble

is that we have selves.

If we had no selves,

what troubles would we have?

Therefore those who embody nobility

to act for the sake of the world

seem to be able to draw the world to them,

while those who embody love

to act for the sake of the world

seem to be worthy of the trust of the world.

The honor and the disgrace are like emotional impacts.

The disaster is regarded as the threat to life.

What does it mean by "The honor and the disgrace are like emotional impacts?"

The honor is awarded to subordinates.

When the honor is obtained, people are thrilled;

when the honor is lost, people are depressed.

So they are emotionally impacted.

What does it mean by "The disaster is regarded as the threat to life?"

The reason we feel threatened because we care too much about ourselves.

If we are selfless, who can threaten us?

To those who can sacrifice themselves for the world, we can trust them with the world.

To those who love the people more than themselves, we can handle the ruling power.

"Welcome disgrace as a fright. Prize calamities as your own body."

Why do we say "welcome disgrace as a fright"?

Welcome denotes "in the low place": Getting "welcome" is a fright, and so is losing it!

That is why we say "welcome disgrace as a fright".

Why do we say "prize calamity as your own self"?

Because our self is the very source of our calamity.

If we have no self, what calamities can we have?

Hence, only he who is willing to give his self for the sake of the world is fit to be entrusted with the world.

Only he who can love to give his self for the sake of the world is worthy of being the steward of the world.

Be alert to be a love pet (or be honored), as if troubles nearby.

What it means by "Be alert to be a love pet?"

Love pet is lowly.

Be one, soon becomes not.

Be not one, despaired.

So, be alert to be a love pet or be honored.

What it means "Honor, troubles nearby?"

We have troubles, being have a body.

Without a body, how could there be misfortune?

Give yourself to mankind, it houses you.

Love mankind, it provides you.

Both favor and disgrace bring fear.

Great trouble comes from having a body.

What
is meant by:

"Both favor and disgrace bring fear"?

Favor leads to a fear of losing it and

disgrace leads to a fear of greater trouble.

What
is meant by:

"Great trouble comes from having a body"?

The reason you have trouble is that

you are self-conscious.

No trouble can befall a self-free person.

Therefore,
surrender your self-interest.

Love others as much as you love yourself.

Then you can be entrusted with all things under heaven.

Both
favor and disgrace are disruptive.

Fortune and privilege cause physical pain.

What does it mean: favor and disgrace are both disruptive?

Favor impresses and disgrace depresses. Trying to get favor makes one anxious,
losing it makes one anxious.

What
does it mean: fortune and privilege cause physical pain?

The reason we feel pain is because we have material bodies.

If we didn't have bodies, how could we feel pain?

Fortune and privilege have material realities, too.

Without class rank or privilege, how could we feel loss?

Thus,
persons who deal with the world and others

as they deal with their own bodies,

living simply,

accepting both joy and pain equally,

are the best people to be entrusted with leadership.

The persons who love and care for the earth

as they do their own bodies,

living simply,

are the best people to entrust with the care of the earth.

Be glad for favour. Still receive favour or disgrace with regular apprehension.

Be cautious not to lose the winning sort of favour. Lower favour and disgrace
can cause one dismay;

We can have fears because we have a self. Yet what we value and what we fear
are as if within that inner sanctimonium self."

What
does this mean:

"Favour and disgrace can cause one dismay?

Those who receive favour from above are dismayed when they receive it.

And should they lose it they turn distraught.

What
does this mean:

"What we value and what we fear are as if within our serious self?"

Regard great trouble as seriously as you regard the body. One reason that we
suffer hurt is that we have bodies.

When we don't regard that gross body as [most important aspect of self, what
have we to fear? [Lao tse.]

And
so, the one who values his experienced world as part of his exploring inner
self, can then be entrusted with rule of something.

he who loves the all as an aspect of his sensing self -

The all can then be entrusted to his care.

"Being favored is so disgraceful that it startles,

Being honored is an affliction as great as one's body."

What is the meaning of "Being favored is so disgraceful that it startles"?

Favor is debasing;

To find it is startling,

To lose it is startling.

This is the meaning of "Being favored is so disgraceful that it startles."

What is the meaning of "Being honored is an affliction as great as one's body"?

The reason I suffer great afflictions is because I have a body;

If I had no body, what affliction could I suffer?

Therefore,

When a man puts more emphasis on caring for his body than on caring for all under heaven,

then all under heaven can be entrusted to him.

When a man is sparing of his body in caring for all under heaven,

then all under heaven can be delivered to him.

Honour and shame are the same as fear.

Fortune and disaster are the same as the person.

What is said of honour and shame is this: shame is abasement, which is feared whether is be absent or present.

So dignity and shame are inseparable from the fear which both occasion.

What is said of fortune and disaster is this: fortune and disaster are things which befall the person.

So without personality how should I suffer disaster or the reverse?

Therefore by the accident of good fortune a man may rule the world for a time.

But by virtue of love he may rule the world for ever.

No Need to Strive

Relationship bliss does not sit on a mountain top

waiting for you to climb up to it.

It sits on your shoulder

waiting for you to notice it.

Joy does not reside in some future world.

It sits across the table from you,

needing only your undivided attention.

Pleasure does not hide in your fantasies

It is ready to come alive

at the next touch of skin to skin.

Are you together right now?

Stop reading.

Stop whatever you are doing.

Put on a piece of music that pleases you.

Come to each other's arms

and dance for five minutes.

Then return to your activities.

What are you waiting for?

Be apprehensive when receiving favour or disgrace. Regard great trouble as seriously as you regard your body.

What is meant by being apprehensive when receiving favour or disgrace?
Favour is considered inferior. Be apprehensive when you receive them
and also be apprehensive when you lose them. This is what is meant by
being apprehensive when receiving favour or disgrace.

What does it mean to regard great trouble as seriously as you regard
your body? The reason why I have great trouble is that I have a body
(and am attached to it). If I have no body, What trouble could I have?

Therefore he who values the world as his body may be entrusted with
the empire. He who loves the world as his body may be entrusted with the
empire.

Favor and disfavor
have been called equal worries,

Success and failure have been called equal ailments.

How can favor and disfavor be called equal worries?

Because winning favor burdens a man

With the fear of losing it.

How can success and failure be called equal ailments?

Because a man thinks of the personal body as self.

When he no longer thinks of the personal body as self

Neither failure nor success can ail him.

One who knows his lot to be the lot of all other men

Is a safe man to guide them,

One who recognizes all men as members of his own body

Is a sound man to guard them.

Mundane people say: "Patronage and insults are shocking;

Be extremely careful of big disasters that can fall on you."

What is "Patronage and insults are shocking"?

They believe that patronage is great and insults are horrible.

Therefore, when they receive patronage, they are shocked and delighted;

When they receive insults, they are shocked and frightened.

So they say, "Patronage and insults are shocking."

How can we comment on "Be extremely careful of big disasters that can fall on you"?

Disaster can fall on me only when I think of myself.

If I do not think about myself, what am I afraid of?

Therefore, those who value giving themselves to society the most can govern society.

Those who devote themselves to society can take care of society.

Honor and disgrace both startle people.

Undue significance is attached to such tribulations

as though they were matters of life and death.

Honor and disgrace both startle people,

Because honor means higher and disgrace means lower in the opinion of others.

Hence,

they become startled with pleasure when honor is given,

And they become startled with displeasure when honor is taken away.

Undue significance is attached to such tribulations

as though they were matters of life and death,

For people think the physical self is real.

If people realize the unreality of the physical self,

How can they attach significance to such tribulations as honor or disgrace?

Therefore,

only one who values the world as oneself is fit to tend the world;

Only one who loves the world as oneself can be entrusted with the care of the world.

Favor is invited and disgrace is feared,

As if they are a disastrous matter of life and death.

One is surprised when favor is bestowed.

One is again surprised when favor is lost

Or when one is afflicted with disgrace.

But why could they mean so much to us?

I would say I can have disasters

Only because I treasure my own life too much.

But if I live beyond my physical existence,

What disaster can matter to me?

Therefore, we should value our own life only to the extent

That we are supporting the world,

And love our physical existence only to the extent

That the world has been entrusted to us.

Success is as dangerous as failure.

Hope is as hollow as fear.

What does it mean that success is a dangerous as failure?

Perceptions of success and failure both arise from concern for the self.

What does it mean that hope is as hollow as fear?

Hope and fear are both phantoms,

they also arise from thinking of the self.

When we don't see the self as self,

what do we have to fear?

Therefore, if you dedicate your life to the benefit of the world,

you can rely on the world.

To the likes of this, the world can be entrusted.

