===== Chapter 9 =====

Grasping and filling—these are not as good as one's own self.

Calculations and vigorousness—these cannot defend for long.

Gold and jewels that fill a hall—none can guard them.

The wealthy are high-ranking but arrogant.

Abandoning themselves is their downfall.

Achievement: Escape the body, withdraw [to]

The Way of Heaven.

Hold and fill it - No as good as stopping in time.

Measure and pound it - It will not long survive.

When gold and jade fill the hall, They cannot be guarded.

Riches and pride Bequeath error.

Withdrawing when work is done: Heaven's Tao.

Fill a pot to overflowing

And you you'll wish you had stopped in time.

Hone a sword to the very sharpest

And it won't stay sharp for long.

Fill your halls with gemstones

And you won't be able to guard them.

Be proud with wealth and status

And you will cause your own fall.

Withdraw when your work is done.

This is the way of heaven.

EXCESS

Stop short of full,

Pour not to the brim.

Over-sharpen the sword,

And the edge will soon blunt.

Be surrounded with treasure,

And lie ill at ease.

Claim title and honor and wealth,

And downfall will follow.

With mission accomplished - withdraw.

Such is in harmony with Tao.

It is better to stop than to hold and overfill a cup.

A blade hammered to a sharp edge does not long endure.

If you fill your house with gold and jade, no one can guard this wealth, honor, and pride.

What follows is your downfall.

Withdraw when your work is done.

This is Heaven's Tao.

THE WAY OF RETICENCE

Fill not a vessel, lest it spill in carrying. Meddle not with a

sharpened point by feeling it constantly, or it will soon become

blunted.

Gold
and jade endanger the house of their possessor. Wealth and honors

lead to arrogance and envy, and bring ruin. Is thy way famous and thy

name becoming distinguished? Withdraw, thy work once done, into

obscurity; this is the way of Heaven.

The full decanter if carried will spill over, The knife in use willlose its edge. Treasures of gold and gems are difficult to protect. Wealthand rank when joined by arrogance will now perish. To fulfill one's tasks,to find acceptance and then to retire to loneliness, is the true spiritualway.

It is better to carry an empty barrel than a full one

Sharpen a knife until it is razor-sharp and it won't last long

When a house is filled with valuables, it is impossible to guard

When wealth and ambition make one arrogant, it will lead to a fall

When fame and success menace you, pull back

That's the only road to true bliss

Going to extremes is never best.

For if you make a blade too sharp, it will become dull too quickly

And if you hoard all the wealth, you are bound to be attacked.

If you become proud and arrogant regarding your good fortune, you will naturally beget enemies who jealously despise you.

The way to success is this: having achieved your goal, be satisfied not to go further. For this is the way Nature operates.

Stretch a bow to the very full,

And you will wish you had stopped in time;

Temper a sword-edge to its very sharpest,

And you will find it soon grows dull.

When bronze and jade fill your hall.

It can no longer be guarded.

Wealth and place breed insolence.

That brings ruin in its train.

When your work is done, then withdraw!

Such is Heaven's Way.

An over-filled cup is difficult to carry.

An over-sharp point is easily broken.

Fill your house with gold and jade

and it cannot be protected.

Become puffed with pride

and disaster will follow.

Do only what needs doing then forget it.

This is the way of heaven.

To maintain but then overdo something

Is not as good as one's showing restraint

To rough out but then (over)hone something

Does not help hold (the edge) long

(When) coins and jade fill the hall

Nobody can defend this

(Being) wealthy & honored and then being proud

The natural consequence is one's own misfortune

(When) the work succeeds a body retires

Keeping to heaven's path

Hubris

To hold it upright and fill it to the brim,

is not so good as stopping in time.

When you pound it out and oversharpens the blade,

the edge will soon blunt.

When gold and jade fills your rooms,

You will never be able to protect it.

Arrogance and pride with wealth and titles,

bring on their own disaster.

Retire when the work is done,

Such is the way of Heaven.

Filling to fullness is not as good as stopping at the right moment.

Oversharpening a blade causes its edge to be lost.

Line your home with treasures and you won't be able to defend it.

Amass possessions, establish positions, display your pride: Soon enough disaster drives you to your knees.

This is the way of heaven: do your work, then quietly step back.

Overstuff your life with thought,

And it will stiffen and suffer.

Keep an eye out for trouble,

And you invite it in.

Make wealth your sole objective

And your heart will grow rigid as ice.

Let fame define you

And you become a stranger to yourself.

Stop the treadmill and renounce expectation:

This is entering the Cosmic rhythm.

We have a phrase in vernacular English for what Lao Tzu is describing here: it is called "paralysis by analysis." Nothing so stiffens feeling, foreshortens influence, or limits understanding, as intellectual reductionism. What follows from this saturation of thought is a kind of hypervigilance and obsessive doubt known in both medical and popular pathology as paranoia. We run the same destructive course when we allow institutional or dogmatic criteria of outer success to define our life's destiny. The correction to all of this is direct and immediately available: we can step off the treadmill and renounce the expectations that have been burned into us by a superficial and self-referential culture.

Guilt and doubt are the engines that drive paranoia, this constant, fearful referencing of experience and phenomena to the bizarre self-interest of a solipsistic world-view. The foundation of this world-view is unstable because it is simply an inaccurate, mistaken vision of the Cosmos and its operations; therefore, it needs to be propped and reinforced by manipulation and the pursuit of power. We push others around and manipulate Nature not because we are designed that way, but because we have been so stuffed with fear that we can no longer feel ourselves.

There is a danger in extremes:

Pull
a bowstring too far,

and you wish you had let go before.

Hone a sword-edge too sharp,

and the edge will wear too soon.

Fill your house with gold and jade,

and you invite thieves.

Be proud and arrogant over good fortune,

and you prepare your own downfall.

When
you have reached your goal,

be satisfied to go no further.

This is the way of Tao.

It is better to leave alone, than to grasp at fullness.

Sharpness, which results from filing, cannot be preserved.

None can protect the hall that is filled with gold and jade.

Opulence, honours, pride, necessarily bequeath calamity.

Merit established, a name made, then retirement – this is the way of Heaven.

Holding and keeping a thing to the very full - it is better to leave it alone;

Handling and sharpening a blade - it cannot be long sustained;

When gold and jade fill the hall, no one can protect them;

Wealth and honour with pride bring with them destruction;

To have accomplished merit and acquired fame, then to retire - This is the Tao of heaven.

The inconstancy of achievement

To grasp and pile things up is not as good as regarding it as already done.

When you measure and build a pillar , you cannot preserve it for long.

When gold and jade fill the hall, you can't keep any of it.

Rich, ennobled and thus proud bequeaths ruin.

With success, disappear: this is the heavenly guide.

To hold things and to be proud of them is not as good as not to have them,

Because if one insists on an extreme, that extreme will not dwell long.

When a room is full of precious things, one will never be able to preserve them.

When one is wealthy, high ranking, and proud of himself, he invites misfortune.

When one's task is completed and his mission is fulfilled, he removes himself from his position.

This is indeed the way of Nature!

To stop in time is better than to hold a full bowl with fear of spilling.

A knife cannot be kept constantly sharp, therefore it is wise not to flaunt the blade.

Amass a hoard of gold and jade and it cannot be possessed for ever.

Those who vaunt their position and worth risk attracting blame.

To retire when the goal is reached: this is the Tao of Heaven.

To hold and fill it to the brim -

You'd better stop it;

To hammer and sharpen it -

You cannot long preserve it;

To fill a room with gold and jade -

Nobody can safeguard it;

To be noble, rich but arrogant -

You will bring yourself calamity.

To withdraw yourself after scoring merits -

Heaven's Tao.

It is better to leave a thing alone

Than to hold it and keep it full to the brim.

If you sharpen the blade and use it,

It will not remain sharp for long.

When gold and jade fill the temple,

No one can protect them.

When wealth and honor come together with pride

Self-destruction quickly joins them.

After the goal has been achieved and the objective has been honorably accomplished,

The Tao of heaven

Is to retire from everything.

Rather than fill it to the brim by keeping it upright

Better to have stopped in time;

Hammer it to a point

And the sharpness cannot be preserved for ever;

There may be gold and jade to fill a hall

But there is none who can keep them.

To be overbearing when one has wealth and position

Is to bring calamity upon oneself.

To retire when the task is accomplished

Is the way of heaven.

Practising Placidity

Grasp to the full, are you not likely foiled? Scheme too sharply, can you wear long? If gold and jewels fill the hall no one can protect it.

Rich and high but proud, brings about its own doom. To accomplish merit and acquire fame, then to withdraw, that is Heaven's Way.

Acting naturally, also know when to stop naturally. Balance is lost if you would continue. Base your achievement not on results, but on whether you followed the act. When the act is complete, it is gone. This is serene.

Filling to the brim is not as good as stopping short;

Polishing to the sharpest does not last long.

A roomful of gold and jade is hard to follow.

One prideful of wealth and fame sows the seeds of sorrow.

With mission accomplished, it is time to offer resignation.

This is cosmos's Direction.

Forcing it fuller and fuller can't compare to just enough,

and honed sharper and sharper means it won't keep for long.

Once it's full of jade and gold your house will never be safe.

Proud of wealth and renown you bring on your own ruin.

Just do what you do, and then leave: such is the Way of heaven.

Holding a cup to fill it to brim,

It is better to stop in time.

Making a sword extremely sharp,

It is hard to keep its sharpness for long.

Filling up a hall with gold and jade;

It cannot be securely guarded.

He who becomes arrogant with wealth and power,

Sows the seeds of his own misfortune.

Retire once the work is successfully completed.

This is the way of heaven.

Holding
yet being full

Lacks compare to not yet being so

A sword blade being oversharpened

Cannot long remain so

A living room full of gold and jade

There is noone able to guard it

Abundant treasures yet arrogance

Self-condemnation, self-punishment.

Outstanding
service performed

The body withdrawing

The tao of the heavens.

To hold a vase filled to the brim, without spilling anything, is impossible; better not to fill it so.

To keep an over-sharpened blade without its edge becoming blunt, is impossible; better not to sharpen it to this extreme.

To keep a roomful of precious stones, without any of it becoming misappropriated, is impossible; better not to amass this treasure.

No extreme can be maintained for a long time. Every height is followed by a decline. Likewise for a man. Whomsoever, having become rich and powerful, takes pride in himself, prepares thereby his own ruin.

To retire at the height of one's own merit and fame, that is the way of heaven.

Holding a cup and overfilling it

Cannot be as good as stopping short

Pounding a blade and sharpening it

Cannot be kept for long

Gold and jade fill up the room

No one is able to protect them

Wealth and position bring arrogance

And leave upon oneself disasters

When achievement is completed, fame attained, withdraw oneself

This is the Tao of Heaven

If you keep filling a container with liquid until it overflows, things will get wet and messy around you. It is better to stop just short of fullness. Similarly, if you pound a blade repeatedly and sharpen it too much, you end up with a blade that is easily broken and won't last very long.

A room that is full of treasures becomes the target of thieves and robbers. It cannot be safeguarded forever. If you become arrogant as the result of great wealth or high position, you are sure to cause yourself big problems, one way or another.

Once you have achieved success and fame, it is best to step gracefully, quietly aside. This is the best way to live - in full accordance with the Tao.

Notes

The central idea: doing anything to excess is a bad idea. Do just enough and nothing extra.

In our translation, the line "cannot be kept for long" is not referring to the activity of pounding and sharpening a blade. It's a reference to the over-sharpened blade that can easily break and therefore cannot last.

Another interpretation of the above is that the sharp edge of the blade cannot be maintained for long.

The "withdraw oneself" phrase does not mean to retreat from society and become a hermit. It means there is no need to brag about your achievements, take on pompous airs, or put on showy displays. Such egotistic acts invariably bring negative consequences.

Continuing to fill a pail after it is full the water will be wasted. Continuing to grind an axe after it is sharp will soon wear it away.

Who can protect a public hall crowded with gold and jewels? The pride of wealth and position brings about their own misfortune. To win true merit, to preserve just fame, the personality must be retiring. This is the heavenly Tao.

To hold and fill (a vessel) to the full (ying),

It had better not be done.

To temper and sharpen a sword,

Its edge could not be kept (pao) long.

To fill the hall with gold and jade,

There is no way to guard (shou) them.

To be rich, exalted, and proud,

This is to invite blame (chiu) upon oneself.

When work is done (sui), the person (sheng) retires,

Such is the Tao of heaven.

There is a danger in extremes: pull a bowstring too far and you wish you had let go before; hone a sword-edge too sharp and the edge will wear too soon; fill your house with gold and jade and you invite thieves; be proud and arrogant over good fortune and you prepare for your own downfall.

When you have reached your goal, be satisfied to go no further. This is the way of Tao.

Fill your bowl all the way: it overflows.

Keep sharpening your sword: it gets dull.

Pile up gold and jade: it cannot be protected.

Increase your wealth, status, and power: you suffer ruin.

Do your work, then withdraw: that's the Way!

Nine

Better to stop short than fill to the brim.

Oversharpen the blade, and the edge will soon blunt.

Amass a store of gold and jade, and no one can protect it.

Claim wealth and titles, and disaster will follow.

Retire when the work is done.

This is the way of heaven.

One should stop in due time

Rather than fill it to the brim.

When a point is whittled too sharp,

Its sharpness cannot remains long.

When a hall is full of gold and jade,

Nobody can keep them long;

When a man of wealth and rank is arrogant,

He is looking for a calamity upon himself;

When one succeeds and subsequently retires,

He follows the true way of heaven.

Rather than hold the bowl until it fills to the brim,

Better quit in time.

Hammer the blade to its sharpest,

And you will be unable to preserve it long.

Fill the hall with gold and jade,

And you will be unable to keep them safe.

He who is arrogant with his wealth and position

Will bring calamity upon himself.

To withdraw when the task is accomplished

Is the way of Heaven.

As brimming with pride will often lead to a downfall,

A timely halt is much preferred.

If you continue to hone the blade of a knife,

You will not be able to preserve its sharp edge.

It is impossible to safeguard a house full of treasures forever.

Wealthy people who are arrogantly extravagant,

Inevitably bring calamity upon themselves.

To retire after a successful career is to follow the way of Dao.

Practice of Placidity

Yun Yi

To hold and fill a vessel to brimful

Is not so good as to stop before the limit.

Hone a tool to its sharpest state,

And its keenness cannot be long preserved.

A hall filled with gold and jade

Can hardly be safeguarded.

To show pride in one's wealth and high rank

Is to pave the way for one's own doom.

Retire after achieving success and winning renown!

This is the Way of Heaven.

Rather than fill a vessel to overflowing, stop in time.

If you temper a swordblade to razor sharpness, it will blunt the sooner.

If you overload your house with gold and jade, how shall it be guarded?

Wealth and high office breed vanity and toruble, and ruin follows in their train.

Accomplish you task, earn honour but do not claim it;

Then withdraw into the background.

That is Heaven's Way.

Hold onto fullness?

It's better to stop.

Handle sharp edges?

They can't long be kept.

When gold and jade fill a house,

No one can protect it.

Pride in wealth and fame

Breeds its own collapse.

Do your work, retire:

This is the Tao of heaven.

A bow that is stretched to its fullest capacity may certainly snap.

A sword that is tempered to its very sharpest may easily be broken.

A house that is full of jade and gold cannot remain secure for long.

One who proudly displays his wealth invites trouble.

Therefore, resign from a high position when your mission is complete.

This is the Universal Way of a life of deep virtue.

IX.

To Go
About at Ease

Is it
better to hold fast to filling, and fill when fullness is gained?

You
may handle the point that is sharpened till all the sharpness is gone,

You
may fill your halls with gold and gems, but thieving is not restrained,

And
wealth and place, when linked with pride, will only bring ruin on;

When
the work is done, and reputation advancing, then, I say,

Is
the time to withdraw and disappear, and that is Heaven s Way.

Let Heavenly Love fill you and overflow in you,

Not according to your measure of fulness.

Prove it, probe deeply into it,

It shall not long withstand you.

You may fill a place with gold and precious stones,

You will not be able to guard them.

You may be weighted with honours and become proud.

Misfortune then will come to your Self.

You may accomplish great deeds and acquire fame,

Retire yourself;

This is Heavenly Tao.

Fill
a cup

to
its brim,

it
is easy

to
spill.

Do
not

over
do the task,

close
it.

Temper
a sword throughout

to
its hardest,

and
it is easily broken.

Fill
your house

with
gold and

jade,

it
can not

be
guarded.

(Do
not tempt

others
for

someone
will

give
in to temptation.)

Set
store

by
your riches and

honor,

you
easily fall.

This
is the Tao

(the
Laws of the Universe):

When
your purpose is achieved retire.

Better to stop than to hold and fill.

Though in tempering a sword, you may feel (the edge), you cannot guarantee (its sharpness) for long.

A hall full of bronze and jade no one can guard.

Wealth and honours lead to pride; thus evil will naturally follow in their train.

To withdraw one's person when the work is done, such is heaven's Way.

It is better to leave a vessel unfilled, than to attempt to

carry it when it is full. If you keep feeling a point that has been

sharpened, the point cannot long preserve its sharpness.

When
gold and jade fill the hall, their possessor cannot keep them

safe. When wealth and honours lead to arrogancy, this brings its evil

on itself. When the work is done, and one's name is becoming

distinguished, to withdraw into obscurity is the way of Heaven.

A bow kept taut will weaken.
The sharpest of swords will lose their
edge in time.
Too much wealth cannot be safeguarded.
Haughtiness draws
misfortune upon itself.
Withdrawing
when JUST ENOUGH has been done;
that is the way of Heaven.

Don't
fill a bowl

Till it's more than full

Or sharpen a blade

Till it must go dull

Don't
pile up treasure

That comes at great cost

Approval and riches

Are easily lost

Can
you only do

What's really needed

Then stop and withdraw

When your task is completed?

As for holding to fullness,

Far better were it to stop in time!

Keep on beating and sharpening a sword,

And the edge cannot be preserved for long.

Fill your house with gold and jade,

And it can no longer be guarded.

Set store by your riches and honour,

And you will only reap a crop of calamities.

Here is the Way of Heaven:

When you have done your work, retire!

Fill a cup to its brim and it is easily spilled.

Keep sharpening your knife,

and it will quickly dull.

When gold and jade fill the hall, their possessor cannot keep them safe.

If you care about people's approval:

you will be their prisoner.

After finishing the work, depart.

This is the Way of Heaven.

It is easier to carry an empty cup

than one that is filled to the brim.

The
sharper the knife

the easier it is to dull.

The more wealth you possess

the harder it is to protect.

Pride brings its own trouble.

When
you have accomplished your goal

simply walk away.

This is the pathway to Heaven.

A good group is better than a spectacular group. When leaders become superstars, the teacher outshines the teaching.

Very few superstars are down-to-earth. Fame breeds fame, and before long the get carried away with themselves. Then they fly off center and crash.

The wise leader settles for good work and then lets others have the floor. The leader does not take credit for what happens and has no need for fame.

A moderate ego demonstrates wisdom.

Filling your cup until it overflows

Is not as good as stopping in time.

Oversharpen your sword

and it will not protect you very long.

You may fil your halls with gold and jewels

But you cannot keep them safe.

Being rich, highly esteemed and proud

will only bring you trouble.

When you have done a good job, rest.This is the Way of Heaven.

Fill
anything to the brim and the contents will spill

out.

Hone a sharpened blade and it will become blunt.

Accumulate great wealth, but be aware that you

cannot keep it.

When
a task is complete, move on.

Change
is the harmony of Infinity.

Keeping your gains

is not as good as knowing when to stop.

Concealed weapons will not long protect you.

A house full of gold and jade cannot be guarded.

Wealth, riches and pride indeed bring misfortune.

Retire when the work is done.

This is the Way of Heaven.

Rather than fill the cup to the brim, it is better to stop in time.

The finely honed blade will soon lose its sharpness.

Fill the hall with gold and jade, and no one can guard it.

Those who take pride in their wealth and honours, attract their own downfall.

To stop when the task is finished is the Way of Heaven.

Rather than possessing more and more wealth,

One would do better to give it all up.

Rather than forging sharper and sharper weapons,

One would get better protection by throwing them away.

One who gets a whole house of gold can not keep it.

One who is proud of wealth and status will suffer for it.

It is in agreement with the spirit of the Way

That one duly withdraws with his successes achieved.

In filling, if you keep on and on - better to have stopped.

In sharpening, if you keep trying - the edge won't last long.

When gold and jade fill the halls, no one can guard it all.

Rich, famous - and conceited: leading to a downfall self-caused.

Achieve successes, win the fame, remove yourself: Heaven's Way.

One should not pour water into a full vessel. And there is no sense to sharpen the edge too much. And if the room is overfilled with gold and jasper who will guard it?

Excessiveness in everything leads to troubles.

When the work is finished, one should retire.

Such are the laws of harmony suggested by Tao.

A tight rope creates tension.

Extended use of a tool

Will render it useless.

Accumulation of riches in a place

Makes that place unsafe.

Being proud of wealth and glory

Is the cause of disgrace.

The Wise Person withdraw after accomplishing actions,

This is the Tao Way of Virtue.

To
grasp at things and seek to fulfill them is not as good as letting them be finished.
[The blade] that is tested and sharpened cannot be long protected. If gold and
jade fill one's halls no one can guard them successfully. Being proud because
of wealth and noble status calls down its own retribution. The Way of Heaven
is that when one's accomplishments have been made <and fame follows> one
should retire from the scene.

Hold [a cup] and fill it to the brim;

Is it not better to stop in time?

Hammer and sharpen [an edge];

It cannot last long.

Fill a hall with gold and jade;

They cannot be protected.

He who is rich, honored, and arrogant brings blame upon himself.

He who withdraws after achieving success and performing duty adheres to the Tao of heaven.

Transcending Decline

Holding to fullness

Is not as good as stopping in time.

Sharpness that probes

Cannot protect for long.

A house filled with riches

Cannot be defended.

Pride in wealth and position

Is overlooking one's collapse.

Withdrawing when success is achieved

Is the Tao in Nature.

As I have said before, a teacup can hold a set amount of water. You can pour in all you like, but it will eventually spill over and much will be lost. At a certain level you can be satisfied. The water in the cup is all you need. That which is still in the pot is desires like fame and fortune. Chase it and your cup will spill.

To take all you want

Is never as good

As to stop when you should.

Scheme and be sharp

And you'll not keep it long.

One can never guard

His home when it's full

Of jade and fine gold:

Wealth, power and pride

Bequeath their own doom.

When fame and success

Come to you, then retire.

This is the ordained Way.

To hold and to fill is not as good as to give up.

If a sword edge is sharpened to its sharpest,

It is hard to last long.

If your hall is filled with gold and jade,

Whoever could keep them safe?

To be proud with honour and wealth will bring misfortune.

To withdraw as soon as the work is done

That is Heaven's right way (Tao).

With it firmly in hand, he goes on to fill it up, but it would be better to quit.

If, having forged it, one goes on to sharpen it, it could not last long.

Gold and jade fill the hall, but none can keep them safe.

If one is arrogant because of wealth and rank, he will give himself a blameworthy fate.

Once achievement has occurred, one retires, for such is the Dao of Heaven.

1. To hold it upright and fill it,

2. Is not so good as stopping [in time].

3. When you pound it out and give it a point,

4. It won't be preserved very long.

5. When gold and jade fill your rooms,

6. You'll never be able to protect them.

7. Arrogance and pride with wealth and rank,

8. On their own bring on disaster.

9. When the deed is accomplished you retire;

10. Such is Heaven's Way!

If you drink
too much, you get drunk.

The engine won't start if you're always tinkering with it.

If you hoard
wealth,

you fall into its clutches.

If you crave success,

you succumb to failure.

Do what you
have to do, then walk away.

Anything else will drive you nuts.

Moderation

Stretch a bow to the very full,

and you will wish you had stopped in time.

Temper a sword-edge to its very sharpest,

and the edge will not last long.

When gold and jade fill your hall,

you will not be able to keep them safe.

To be proud with honor and wealth

is to cause one's own downfall.

Withdraw as soon as your work is done.

Such is heaven's way.

Better it is to observe moderation than to fill to overflowing.

Impossible it is to use a tool at the same time impossible, too, greedily to accumulate treasures and to be secure at the same time.

For possessions beget possession possession begets arrogance and arrogance disaster.

By observing moderation when his work is completed by keeping back his ego and by shunning fame the wisdom of the Awakened Man is evidenced.

The Danger of Overweening Success

Lao Tze says,

A full utensil in hand has to be halted.

The blade sharpened to the thinnest edge, cannot be endured long.

A hall full of jewels and gold, can never be safely guarded.

A man who takes pride in richness and nobleness, has his downfall because of the seeds he sowed.

Recess at the day of success, such is the way of Heaven.

WITHOUT EXTREMES

The
cup is easier to hold

when not filled to overflowing.

The
blade is more effective

if not tempered beyond its mettle.

Gold
and jade are easier to protect

if possessed in moderation.

He
who seeks titles,

invites his own downfall.

The
sage works quietly,

seeking neither praise nor fame;

completing what he does with natural ease,

and then retiring.

This is the way and nature of Tao.

Fill your bowl to the brim

and it will spill.

Keep sharpening your knife

and it will blunt.

Chase after money and security

and your heart will never unclench.

Care about people's approval

and you will be their prisoner.

Do your work, then step back.

The only path to serenity.

Do not concentrate one's wealth in abundance.

It is far better for one to know where to stop.

Do not beat one's sword sharp, one can never keep its edge for ever.

If their houses are full of gold and jade, they have no way to keep them forever.

If they are proud of having great riches and honors, they just make more troubles for themselves.

When merits have been achieved, fame has been completed - one may withdraw himself.

That is to follow the law of Nature.

Hanging on to it will cause overflow, better to let go.

Forced consent does not endure.

Filling the house with gold and jade will not bring safety.

Riches and royalty result in pride, they bring about their own punishment.

When the work is done, the body withdraws.

This is the Tao of heaven.

IX

Fill
a bowl to the rim; will it spill?

Force something to fit; will it break?

Amass great wealth; will you be robbed?

Achieve fame and status; will you be laughed at?

Better
to avoid the questions:

Accomplish your ends, then walk away

Such is the road of peace

To Keep on Filling

To keep on filling

Is not as good as stopping.

Calculated sharpness

cannot be kept for long.

Though gold and jewels fill their houses,

no one can keep them.

When the rich upper classes are haughty,

their legacy indicts them.

When one's work is accomplished honorably,

to retire is the Way of heaven.

To fill to its full is not as good as to leave it alone.

Why make things very sharp, if the edge can not keep long-lasting sharpness.

Greed for treasure cannot make the fortune last.

Rich and arrogant, one would bring troubles for oneself.

Retire when the goal is achieved; this conforms to Tao.

You hold to fullness, and it is better to stop in time!

You keep on beating and sharpening a sword, and the edge cannot be preserved for long.

You fill your house with gold and jade, and it can no longer be guarded.

You put on airs by your riches and honor, and you will only reap a crop of calamities.

Here is the Way of Heaven: When you have done your work, retire.

Be contain, better than over flow.

Too sharp, easy to break.

Too rich, difficult to protect.

Too proud of wealth and titles, asking for disaster.

Retire after success, heaven's Tao.

Better to stop in time than to fill to the brim.

Hone a blade to the sharpest point,

and it will soon be blunt.

Fill your house with gold and jade,

and no one can protect it.

Be prideful about wealth and position,

and you bring disasters upon yourself.

Retire when the work is done.

This is the way of heaven.

Better
to underfill

than to overfill a cup.

The overstretched bow

soon breaks.

The
constantly sharpened blade

soon dulls.

A
house full of possessions and wealth

cannot always be protected.

A
mind full of morality and social convention

will not always be right.

Materialism
and ambition

bring their own ruin.

Draw
back

from your completed work and fame.

This is the way

of water.

Stretch a bow to the full, and you'll end up wishing you'd stopped in time;
to hold and fill to overflowing isn't quite as able as to stop in time.

Temper a sword-edge to its very sharpest, and you'll find it soon grows dull.

When gold and jade fills your hall, can it be well guarded any more?

To be proud with things and glory given, could bring ruin. Wealth and place
breed insolence and could slowly harm and ruin:

If your work is done, withdraw!

That's heaven's way. It can be opposed to lots of ways of man.

Instead of keeping a bow taut while holding it straight, better to relax.

You may temper a sword until it is razor sharp, but you cannot preserve the edge for long.

When gold and jade fill your rooms, no one will be able to guard them for you.

If wealth and honor make you haughty, you bequeath misfortune upon yourself.

To withdraw when your work is finished,

that is the Way of heaven.

It is advisable to refrain from continual reaching after wealth.

Continual handling and sharpening wears away the most durable thing.

If the house be full of jewels, who shall protect it?

Wealth and glory bring care along with pride.

To stop when good work is done and honour advancing is the way of Heaven.

Nothing Else Would Matter

The busier you are with important things

the further from each other you will be.

The more you work,

the lonelier you will become.

The more you try to please people,

the more you will become their prisoner.

How much money is enough?

How many purchases are necessary

to secure your happiness?

Enjoy your work,

then forget it.

Let the eyes and arms

of your beloved

wash it all away.

There was a time when you knew,

beyond doubt,

that if you could just wake up

next to this person

every morning,

nothing else would matter.

Remember?

To hold and fill a cup to overflowing Is not as good as to stop in time.

Sharpen a sword edge to its very sharpest, And the (edge) will not last long.

When gold and jade fill your hall, You will not be able to keep them.

To be proud with honour and wealth Is to cause one's own downfall.

withdraw as soon as your work is done. Such is Heaven's Way.

Keep stretching
a bow

You repent of the pull,

A 'whetted saw

Goes thin and dull,

Surrounded with treasure

You lie ill at ease,

Proud beyond measure

You come to your knees:

Do enough, without vieing,

Be living, not dying.

To be overflowing is not as good as having just enough.

If a point is made too sharp, the sharpness will not last long.

A houseful of treasure is impossible to keep.

The rich and arrogant are destined for disaster.

When you are successful and famous, quickly back out, which is the heavens' way.

To fill to the brim is to be out of balance,

Wherefore it is better to stop before overfilling.

To over-sharpen a sword is to be out of balance,

Wherefore its edge will not last long.

To line a hall with gold and jade is to be out of balance,

Wherefore no one can guard them.

If wealth and rank make a man haughty and clinging,

He will surely bequeath misfortune upon himself.

If success is achieved and honor bestowed,

Quietly withdraw from your position.

This is the Way of Heaven.

Rather than possessing more and more wealth,

One would do better to give it all up.

Rather than forging sharper and sharper weapons,

One would get better protection by throwing them away.

One who gets a whole house of gold can not keep it.

One who is proud of wealth and status will suffer for it.

It is in agreement with the spirit of the Way

That one duly withdraws with his successes achieved.

Fill a cup to its brim and it is easily spilled.

Keep sharpening your knife,

and it will quickly dull.

When gold and jade fill the hall, their possessor cannot keep them safe.

If you care about people's approval:

you will be their prisoner.

After finishing the work, depart.

This is the Way of Heaven.

