===== Chapter 17 =====

The highest superiors—

People below them [merely] know they have them.

The next highest—people below them love and praise them.

The next highest—people below them fear them.

The next highest—people below them insult them.

Where trust is insufficient

There is distrust.

So gentle, [the sage] values their words.

[And so when] their achievements are completed

And their work is successful

The hundred clans all proclaim

"We are naturally like this!"

Great rising and falling - People only know it exists. Next they see and praise. Soon they fear. Finally they despise.

Without fundamental trust There is no trust at all. Be careful in valuing words.

When the work is done, Everyone says We just acted naturally.

Of the best leaders people barely know they exist.

Next come the ones people love and praise.

Then the ones they fear.

Then the ones they disdain.

Those who don't trust receive no trust.

The best leader is sparing in his use of words.

When his task is accomplished, when his work done.

Everyone says: "We did it ourselves."

GREAT LEADER

The greatest leader is barely known to exist.

Next is one who is loved and acclaimed.

Then one who is feared.

Finally one who is despised.

The great leaders,

Having faith and confidence in others,

Receive faith and confidence in return.

In a quiet and calm manner, with few words,

See the task accomplished,

See the work complete.

A measure of great leadership -

When all feel the task was completed

of its own accord.

The superior person who is below* perceives reality.

The next best person loves and praises them.

The next best person is in fear of them.

The next best person despises them.

Good intentions are not adequate in that place of reality.

People are reluctant to not have good intentions!

They have words.

They reward accomplishment

True success is achieved when the hundred families (all people) say it is as though we all did it together.

* The concept that if you place yourself below everything then you will be able to receive everything and accurately perceive your world; e.g., the ocean lies below the rivers to receive them.

THE PURITY OF THE CURRENT

In the Age of Gold, the people were not conscious of their rulers; in the

Age of Silver, they loved them, with songs; in the Age of Brass, they

feared them; in the Age of Iron, they despised them. As the rulers

lost confidence, so also did the people lose confidence in them.

How
hesitating did they seem, the Lords of the Age of Gold, speaking with

deliberation, aware of the weight of their word! Thus they accomplished

all things with success; and the people deemed their well-being to be the

natural course of events.

When a ruler is truly great the people hardly notice his existence.Some of their successors were admired, some were feared, some were despised,Rulers without faith in the people lost the people's confidence. The greatrulers did not aggrandize themselves, They performed their tasks and thepeople felt: We are among ourselves.

Of the wise of old, people only knew that they existed

Later on they loved them and admired them

Thereafter they got scared of them

And finally the wise were seen as despicable

One who can't trust oneself, can't trust another

How cautious were the first with their words

They proceeded so cautiously that when they where done

The people thought they did it themselves

The most intelligent leaders bring about results without making those controlled realize that they are being influenced. The less intelligent seek to motivate others by appeals to loyalty, honour, self-interest, and flattery. Those still less intelligent employ fear by making their followers think they will not receive their rewards. The worst try to force others to improve by condemning their conduct.

But since, if leaders do not trust their followers then their followers will not trust the leaders, The intelligent leader will be careful not to speak as if he doubted or distrusted his follower's ability to do the job suitably.

When the work is done, and as he wanted it done, he will be happy if the followers say: "This is just the way we wanted it."

Of the highest the people merely know that such a one exists;

The next they draw near to and praise.

The next they shrink from, intimidated; but revile.

Truly, "It is by not believing people that you turn them into liars".

But from the Sage it is so hard at any price to get a single word

That when his task is accomplished, his work done,

Throughout the country every one says: "It happened of its own accord".

When a sage governs, people barely notice.

Lesser rulers are praised and loved.

Lesser still are feared and obeyed.

The least are ridiculed and despised.

Trust is earned by trusting.

The sage uses words sparingly.

His work is done without fanfare.

People say: "It happened by itself."

Great leaders' subordinates know of their existence

Those next in order are loved and praised by them

Those next in order are feared by them

Those next in order are despised by them

If trust lacks basis here

There will be no trust here

So step back- there is value to words

Complete the task, follow through in the work

The hundred families all will declare

"(It was) our natural course!"

Rulers

With the highest rulers -

Those below simply know they exist.

With those one step down -

They love and praise them.

With those one further step down -

They fear them.

And with those at the bottom -

They ridicule and insult them.

Who does not trust enough

will not be trusted.

Hesitant and undecided!

Like this is his respect for speaking.

He completes his tasks and finishes his affairs

Yet the common people say,

"These things all happened by nature."

The best leader is one whose existence is barely known. Next best is one who is lived and praised. Next is one who is feared. Worst of all is a leader who is despised.

If you fail to trust people, they won't turn out to be trustworthy.

Therefore, guide others by quietly relying on Tao. Then, when the work is done, the people can say, "We did this ourselves."

The truly developed self

Is ever aware of the Cosmic Presence.

Another may abide

In love and praise of it;

Still another might fear it;

And finally there are those

Who hold it in contempt.

Trust is not built on faith;

It is nurtured on experience.

One following the Sage uses words sparingly,

And lets his natural action speak;

His work is not enslaved to a goal-

Its accomplishment is his statement.

Then progress happens

As if no one had tried.

The Best Leader

The
best leaders, the people do not notice.

The next best, the people honor and praise.

The next, the people fear;

and the next, the people hate.

If
you have no faith,

people will have no faith in you,

and you must resort to oaths.

When
the best leader's work is done

the people say: "We did it ourselves!"

First the supreme. Then a sense of separateness. Next preferences and eulogies. Lastly, fear. Then scorn.

Hence it is plain that lack of sincerity has its origins in superficial faith.

Cautious! They valued their words, accomplished their purposes, settled their affairs, and the people all said: "We are spontaneous."

The great rulers - the people do not notice their existence; The lesser ones - they attach to and praise them; The still lesser ones - they fear them; The still lesser ones - they despise them.

For where faith is lacking, It cannot be met by faith.

Now how much importance must be attributed to words!

Politics

The best hierarchy is one those below realize is there.

Next to that

is one that you feel kin to and extol.

Next to that

is one you dread.

Next to that

is one you contemn.

When reliability is inadequate in it

There will be unreliability in it.

Reflectively! His ennobling of language.

Works are completed; affairs proceed

And the hundred surnames all call this 'our nature (our own doing)'

The best leader is one whom no one knows.

The next best is one who is intimate with the people and is flattered by them.

The next is one who is feared by the people.

The next is one who is held in contempt by the people.

Therefore, when one's sincerity is not sufficient, one does not have the confidence of the people.

Be cautious! and spare words.

Then when work is done and things are accomplished,

People will say that things happened by themselves.

The best rulers are those whom the people barely know exist.

The next best are those whom the people love and praise.

Then there are those whom the people fear and despise.

If they do not rule the country with faith, the people will not respond to them with trust.

The best rulers do not need to rule the people with words.

If they have accomplished their task, the people will be ruled automatically.

The supreme sovereign - the people barely knew he was there;

The next - they loved and praised him;

The next - they feared him;

The lowest - they despised him.

Only when his trust became deficient

Was there distrust.

Hesitant, he grudged his words;

Merits scored, affairs accomplished,

The hundred family names said: "That's the way things are with us."

The greatest rulers are the ones whose existence the people do not notice at all,

The rulers who are inferior to them are the ones whom the people honor and praise,

And inferior to those are the ones of whom they are afraid,

And inferior to those are the ones whom they despise.

When there is a lack of faith in the ruler,

No one believes in his rule.

Now, learn how much importance must be attributed to words.

The best of all rulers is but a shadowy presence to his subjects.

Next comes the ruler they love and praise;

Next comes one they fear;

Next comes one with whom they take liberties.

When
there is not enough faith, there is lack of good faith.

Hesitant,
he does not utter words lightly.

When his task is accomplished and his work done

The people all say, 'It happened to us naturally.'

Simplicity In Habits

Of great rulers the subjects do not notice the existence. To lesser ones people are attached; they praise them. Still lesser ones people fear, and the meanest ones people despise.

For it is said:

"If your faith be insufficient, verily, you will receive no faith."

How reluctantly they [the great rulers] considered their words! Merit they accomplished; deeds they performed; and the hundred families thought: "We are independent."

The master of the Tao is the highest. The next is the person who causes others to love him. The next is the person who causes others to fear him. The lowest is the person who causes others to despise him. The master trusts in the Tao, therefore doesn't try to improve others. Limited in his words, he lets his actions speak loudly. Others begin following his actions and success comes naturally.

At the highest level, one is unseen.

At the next level, one is liked and praised.

At the next level, one is feared.

At the next level, one is ridiculed.

One lacking in trustworthiness loses the [populace's] trust.

Carefree, one values one's words.

With work accomplished and business done, the gentry say: "We do this naturally."

The loftiest ruler is barely known among those below.

Next comes a ruler people love and praise.

After that, one they fear, and then one they despise.

If you don't stand sincere by your words

how sincere can the people be?

Take great care over words, treasure them,

and when the hundred-fold people see

your work succeed in all they do

they'll say it's just occurrence appearing of itself.

The best ruler, the people only know of his existence;

The next best, the people praise and want to be near him;

The next, the people fear him;

The last, the people despise him.

If there is not enough faith,

There will be no faith.

The best ruler is so relaxed, he hardly talks.

When he successfully completes his work,

People all say that for us, it is only natural.

The
very highest, little knowledge is present of it

That next is attached to yet praised

That next is respected

That next is despised.

Where
there is belief without enough within

A lack of believing what is within is present.

So
remote, those treasure words

Outstanding service performed, efforts successful

the one hundred families say

We did it naturally.

In the early days (when, in human affairs, everything still conformed to the action of the Principle), subjects scarcely knew that they had a prince (so discreet was the action of the latter). After this the people loved and flattered their prince (because of his good deeds), but later on, they feared him (because of his laws), and scorned him (because of his unjust acts).

They became disloyal, though having been treated disloyally. They lost confidence in him though receiving only good words which were never put into effect.

How delicate was the touch of ancient rulers. When everything prospered under their administration, the people believed they had done everything themselves, of their own free will.

The highest rulers, people do not know they have them

The next level, people love them and praise them

The next level, people fear them

The next level, people despise them

The rulers' trust is insufficient, have no trust in them

Proceeding calmly, valuing their words

Task accomplished, matter settled

The people all say, "We did it naturally"

At the highest level, the ideal rulers are the ones who are so good at what they do that they can achieve their objectives quickly, silently and effectively. They do not glory in their achievements, so the people are not even aware that such rulers exist.

At the next level down, we have rulers whose benevolent actions can be seen, so that people are aware of them. The people feel close to such rulers and they give much praise for the benevolent, positive rule.

At the next level down, we have rulers who resort to intimidation and heavy-handed policies. People fear such rulers.

At the next level down, we have rulers who are incompetent or seek to deceive the people through trickery. People despise such rulers. They insult the leadership and rise up in opposition.

If such rulers cannot have sufficient trust the people, then how can the people have trust in them?

The ideal way is to govern in an unhurried, easy manner where rulers greatly values their words. This means they do more and talk less.

Because things are done this way, without anyone being aware of all the work that go into governing, when important tasks are completed and major issues are settled, the people all say that they did it themselves, and that it was naturally so.

Notes

The original Chinese is not gender specific in referring to the ruler. It does not assert in any way that the ruler must be male. Most translators arbitrarily force the gender to either male or female, which distorts the original meaning.

Like several other passages from the Tao Te Ching, this chapter seems to be aimed at the ancient kings of China. It is as if Lao Tzu was asked to advise the Emperor on the best way to rule. How can such passages apply to us, who are not necessarily in exalted positions of political power?

Do not think of ruling in the literal way that only applies to governance of a nation. Look at your own life and note all the settings and circumstances where leadership plays a role. Most of us will, at some point, start our own families, and we may be called upon to assume the responsibility of leadership in social settings, community activities, or the workplace.

The Tao of leadership remains constant in any context. Whether you find yourself having to deal with your children, neighbors or coworkers, you'll find the distinctions in this chapter a useful guide.

SIMPLICITY OF HABIT

When great men rule, subjects know little of their existence. Rulers who are less great win the affection and praise of their subjects. A common ruler is feared by his subjects, and an unworthy ruler is despised.

When a ruler lacks faith, you may seek in vain for it among his subjects.

How carefully a wise ruler chooses his words. He performs deeds, and accumulates merit! Under such a ruler the people think they are ruling themselves.

The best government, the people know it is just there.

The next best, they love and praise it.

The next, they fear it.

The next, they revile against it.

When you don't trust (hsin) [the people] enough,

Then they are untrustworthy (pu hsin).

Quiet, why value words (yen)?

Work is accomplished, things are done.

People all say that I am natural (tzu-jan).

The Best Leader

As for the best leaders, the people do not notice their existence. The next best, the people honor and praise. The next, the people fear; and the next, the people hate.

If you have no faith people will have no faith in you, and you must resort to oaths.

When the best leader's work is done the people say: "We did it ourselves!"

The best ruler: hardly known to exist.

Next best: known and loved.

Next best: feared.

The worst: despised.

No trust given, no trust received.

The best ruler rules without fanfare.

When his work is successful, the people say,

"Fantastic! We've done it!"

Seventeen

The very highest if barely known.

Then comes that which people know and love.

Then that which is feared,

Then that which is despised.

Who does not trust enough will not be trusted.

When
actions are performed

Without unnecessary speech,

People say, "We did it!"

The best ruler is unknown to his subjects;

Next comes the ruler loved and praised;

Next comes the ruler being feared;

Next comes the ruler disdained.

The lack of faith on the part of the ruler

Leads to the lack of confidence in him on the part of the people.

The best ruler is leisurely and carefree, seldom issuing orders.

When the state affairs are properly dealt with,

The people all say, "It should have happened to us like this."

Of the rulers, the best is one of whose existence his people are [merely] aware;

Next comes one whom they love and praise;

Next comes one whom they fear;

Next comes one whom they despise.

When you don't trust them,

They will not trust you.

Calm, I rarely speak.

Yet the task is accomplished;

The people call me tzu-jan.

People take the great ruler for granted and are oblivious to his presence.

The good ruler is loved and acclaimed by his subjects.

The mediocre ruler is universally feared.

The bad ruler is generally despised;

Because he lacks credibility, the subjects do not trust him.

On the other hand, the great ruler seldom issues orders.

Yet he appears to accomplish everything effortlessly.

To his subjects everything he does is just a natural occurrence.

The Atmosphere of Simplicity

Ch'un Feng

The best rulers are not known to the people;

Then come those who are loved and praised;

Then those who are held in awe;

And lastly those who are despised.

When one's faith is inadequate,

It will not evoke faith from other people.

(Wise rulers) are wary and treasure their words.

When their task is accomplished and their work done,

All the people would say:

"We did it of our free will."

The greatest of kings rules, and his subjects are hardly aware of his existence.

The less great is loved and praised by his subjects.

The still less great is feared by his subjects.

The still less great is despised by his subjects.

For truly, where faith is not given, confidence is not inspired.

How guarded, and how sparing, is the greatest of kings in giving utterance to his precious words!

When his task is accomplished and all his undertakings crowned with success,

The people, scarcely aware that they are ruled at all,

Say: All this happens according to nature.

Of the best ruler,

The people only know he exists.

Next comes one the love and praise.

Next comes one they fear.

Next comes one they abhor.

When you are lacking in trust,

Others have no trust in you.

Of the work of one who is short with his words,

The hundred families say,

We have done it ourselves!

High beings of deep universal virtue work unassertively.

They help all people,

yet people are barely aware of their existence.

Leaders of great achievement earn the friendship and praise of people.

Leaders of great strength make people afraid.

People despise and defy a leader who is untrustworthy.

One cannot inspire confidence in people through words alone;

it must be accompanied by correct deeds.

When one of subtle virtue has accomplished his task, all the people will say:

"It is we ourselves who made it so."

XVII.

Plain
Teachings

In
the highest antiquity people scarce knew

That
rulers existed among them;

In
the next age attachment and praise for them grew,

In
the next people feared they might wrong them;

And then in the next age the people despised

The
rulers whom fate set above them,

For
when faith by the rulers no longer is prized,

The
people no longer can love them.

Those
earliest rulers! what caution they had

In
weighing the words they were using;

How
successful their deeds! while the people all said

We
are what we are by our choosing.

In ancient times

The people knew that they had rulers.

Then they loved and praised them,

Then they feared them,

Then they despised them.

The rulers did not trust the people,

The people did not trust the rulers.

The rulers were grave, their words were precious.

The people having finished their work,

and brought it to a successful issue, said:

"We affirm the Self."

The
best type of leader

is
one of whose existence

the
people are barely aware.

Next
comes one

whom
they love and praise.

Next
comes one

whom
they fear.

Next
comes one

whom
they despise and defy.

When
you are

lacking
in faith,

Others
will be

unfaithful
to you.

The
Complete Thinker is

quiet
and uses few words.

When
tasks have been

accomplished
and

things
have been completed,

All
the people say,

"We
ourselves have achieved it!"

In highest (antiquity) one did not even know there were (rulers).

Next one loved them and praised them.

Next one feared them.

Next one despised them.

If good faith (of the prince towards the people) is inadequate, good faith (of the people towards the ruler) will be wanting.

Thoughtful were (the sage rulers), valuing their words!

When the work was done and things ran smoothly, the people all said: "We have done it ourselves!"

In the highest antiquity, (the people) did not know that there

were (their rulers). In the next age they loved them and praised

them. In the next they feared them; in the next they despised them.

Thus it was that when faith (in the Tao) was deficient (in the rulers)

a want of faith in them ensued (in the people).

How
irresolute did those (earliest rulers) appear, showing (by

their reticence) the importance which they set upon their words!

Their work was done and their undertakings were successful, while the

people all said, 'We are as we are, of ourselves!'

Preeminent is One whose subjects barely know that He exists.
Next follows
one whom the people feel close to, and praise.
The next is one whom the people
fear;
and the lowest, they despise.
When
a 'Ruler' is not trusting,
he is not trustworthy.
But,
if carefully he measures his words,
when his work is done and his affairs
completed,
his subjects will say,
"this is like being left to ourselves."

It's
best if you are barely known

The lesser state is being praised

Worse is being hated

Just stay empty and amazed

Only
do what must be done

And see you are the one alone

When you finish all will say

We did this on our own

THE highest type of ruler is one of whose existence the people are barely aware.

Next comes one whom they love and praise.

Next comes one whom they fear.

Next comes one whom they despise and defy.

When you are lacking in faith,

Others will be unfaithful to you.

The Sage is self-effacing and scanty of words.

When his task is accomplished and things have been completed,

All the people say, "We ourselves have achieved it!"

When the Master governs, the people

are hardly aware that he exists.

Second best is a leader who is loved.

Next, is one who is feared.

The worst is one who is despised.

Such as these have no faith in their people,

and the people in turn become unfaithful to them.

The Master doesn't talk; he acts.

How sparing he is with his words!

When his work is complete and the purpose is achieved,

the people regard the triumph as their own.

The best leaders are those the people hardly know exist.

The next best is a leader who is loved and praised.

Next comes the one who is feared.

The worst one is the leader that is despised.

If
you don't trust the people,

they will become untrustworthy.

The
best leaders value their words, and use them sparingly.

When she has accomplished her task,

the people say, "Amazing:

we did it, all by ourselves!"

The wise leader does not intervene unnecessarily. The leader's presence is felt, but often the group runs itself.

Lesser leaders do a lot, say a lot, have followers, and form cults.

Even worse ones use fear to energize groups to overcome resistance.

Only the most dreadful leaders have bad reputations.

Remember that you are facilitating another person's process. It is not your process. Do not intrude. Do not control. Do not force your own needs and insights into the foreground.

If you do not trust a person's process, that person will not trust you.

Imagine that you are a midwife; you are assisting at someone else's birth. Do good without show or fuss. Facilitate what is happening rather than what you think ought to be happening. If you must take the lead, lead so that the mother is helped, yet still free and in charge.

When the baby is born, the mother will rightly say: "We did it ourselves!"

The best leader is one that the people are barely aware of.

The next best is one who is loved and praised by the people.

Next comes one who is feared.

Worst is one who is despised.

If the leader does not have enough faith in the people,

They will not have faith in him.

The best leader puts great value in words and says little

So that when his work is finished

The people All say, "We did it ourselves!"

The
best leaders are in harmony with their

followers.

The next best are those who are respected.

Then comes those who are feared.

The worst are those who are despised.

If
one perceives others as untrustworthy,

then that will be the experience that

one acknowledges.

The selective acknowledgment of

untrustworthiness

verifies one's perception of the

untrustworthiness

of others.

When
the leaders are in harmony with their

followers,

few laws are necessary

and all tasks are accomplished with ease.

The
followers, not perceiving the

administration

of leadership, marvel at the

manifestations

of harmony and experience a sense of

self worth.

The best rulers are barely known to their subjects.

The next best are loved and praised.

The next are feared.

And the worst are insulted.

The dishonest are not trusted.

Good advice is soon forgotten.

Once the results are achieved,

everyone takes credit.

The best rulers are those whom the people hardly know exist.

Next come rulers whom the people love and praise.

After that come rulers whom the people fear.

And the worst rulers are those whom the people despise.

The ruler who does not trust the people will not be trusted by the people.

The best ruler stays in the background, and his voice is rarely heard.

When he accomplishes his tasks, and things go well,

The people declare: It was we who did it by ourselves.

The best king rules so that people know that "there is a king."

The less wise king rules so that he is praised and loved.

The still less wise king rules so that he is feared.

The worst king rules so that he is cursed.

He who abides by nothing,

Who rules by saying and doing nothing misleading,

Achieves such political success that people all think

They are just following their own nature.

The greatest ruler: those under him only know he exists the next best kind: they love and praise him the next: they are in awe of him the next: they despise him.

When sincerity does not suffice it was not sincerity.

("Reticent - he is sparing with words.") He achieves successes he accomplishes his tasks and the hundred clans all say: We are just being natural.

The Highest Ruler gives the possibility to develop the consciousness to all His people. Yet He does not try to show them favor or reward them with the "earthly". He also does not try to make people fear Him.

Those who foolishly believe do not know about this. But those who cognized Him do not believe fully any more.

This truth is so profound!

Having achieved success, I go further, and greater understanding about Everything opens to me.

The best leaders are unknown.

Other leaders could be loved and praised.

Others create fear or are hated.

When
the leaders don't trust people,

People will not trust the leaders.

Actions are more important than the words.

The
people do not know that the Highest exists. They praise and seek to get close
to those on the next level. They fear those on the next level, and despise those
on the level below that.

"When
trust is inadequate there will be untrustworthiness.''

How
remote they appear in their [valuing words =] unwillingness to speak lightly.
When their accomplishments come to fruition and events follow therefrom in their
natural course, then the common people all say: "We did it of our own accord.''

Of the best, the people barely know of his existence.

Of the next best, the people love and praise him.

Of the next one, the people are afraid of him.

And of the next, the people despise him.

He who does not trust others enough will not be trusted by them.

Therefore, hesitating, one should carefully choose his words.

When he accomplishes his task and the things get done,

The people all say: "We have done it by ourselves."

The Way of Subtle Influence

Superior leaders are those whose existence is merely known;

The next best are loved and honored;

The next are respected;

And the next are ridiculed.

Those who lack belief

Will not in turn be believed.

But when the command comes from afar

And the work is done, the goal achieved,

The people say, "We did it naturally."

A leader that lives among his people is respected. He shops in their stores and does not stand out. He shows respect to everyone he passes. He does not lecture law, but lives the example of it. He gives credit to the people of the community and takes none for himself. There is no telling the leader from the crowd. One that lives above them is despised.

As for him who is highest,

The people just know he is there.

His deputy's cherished and praised;

Of the third, they are frightened;

The fourth, they despise and revile.

If you trust people less than enough,

Some of them never trust you.

He
is aloof, as if his talk

Were priced beyond the purchasing;

But once his project is contrived,

The folk will want to say of it:

"Of course! We did it by ourselves!"

The best rulers are those about whom people know nothing but their existence.

The next best are those whom people love and praise,

The next best are those whom people fear,

The next are those whom people despise.

Only when one is not faithworthy, will faithless events take place!

So idle, (the best rulers) seldom issue any orders.

When some affairs are accomplished,

All common people will say "We are in ourselves."

The "very highest" by those below is just known to exist.

The next is he who is a parent to them, in whom they rejoice.

The next is he whom they fear.

The next is he whom they treat with contempt.

If one fails to have trust, a corresponding lack of trust in him occurs.

He takes his time, oh, as he weighs his words carefully.

And, when success is had and the task accomplished, the common folk all say, "We just live naturally."

1. With the highest [kind of rulers], those below simply know they exist.

2. With those one step down—they love and praise them.

3. With those one further step down—they fear them.

4. And with those at the bottom—they ridicule and insult them.

5.
When trust is insufficient, there will be no trust [in them].

6. Hesitant, undecided! Like this is his respect for speaking.

When the Masters
take charge,

hardly anybody notices.

The next best leader is obeyed out of love.

After that, there's the leader who is obeyed out of fear.

The worst leader is the one who is hated.

Trust and respect
people.

That's how you earn their trust and respect.

The Masters
don't give orders;

they work with everybody else.

When the job's done,

people are amazed at what they accomplished.

.

Leaders

The best leaders the people barely know.

The next best they love and praise.

The next they fear.

And the next they hate.

Those who lack trust will not be trusted.

Then they resort to promises.

But when they accomplish their task and complete their work,

the people say, "We did it ourselves."

True leaders are hardly felt less perfect ones find followers and devotion still lesser ones arouse fear and resistance unwise ones reap derision and disdain.

Only he who sows confidence reaps confidence.

The Sage chooses and weighs his words.

Imperceptibly he serves the good and leads to completion and the people feel free.

The Ancient Government

Lao Tze says,

In the highest antiquity, people only knew that there were rulers.

Next were those they loved and praised.

Then there were those they feared.

And finally there were those they despised.

Thus it was when the ruler was deficient in the Tao faith that his people ensured him with want of faith.

How irresolute are those who appreciate reticence.

Although the work was completed and the undertaking successful, all the people would say, 'it happened to us naturally.'

LEADERSHIP BY EXCEPTION

Man
cannot comprehend the infinite;

only knowing that the best exists,

the second best is seen and praised,

and the next, despised and feared.

The
sage does not expect that others

use his criteria as their own.

The
existence of the leader who is wise

is barely known to those he leads.

He acts without unnecessary speech,

so that the people say,

"It happened of its own accord".

When the Master governs, the people

are hardly aware that he exists.

Next best is a leader who is loved.

Next, one who is feared.

The worst is one who is despised.

If you don't trust the people,

you make them untrustworthy.

The Master doesn't talk, he acts.

When his work is done,

the people say, "Amazing: we did it, all by ourselves!"

The highest rule is that the people are not aware of being ruled.

The next is that they love and praise it.

The last is what they fear and defy.

Truth alone is not enough, some truth is not always true.

It is still better to have Economy of Words.

After personal duties were accomplished, and the state affairs were satisfied - all people said "He is natural".

The eminent has consciousness of self.

The next down are loved and praised.

The next down are feared,

At the bottom is the source.

When faith is weak, there is distrust.

Especially in the worth of speech.

Results speak for themselves.

This, people call me Nature.

XVII

The
greatest leaders are never seen, their presence is never felt

Lesser rulers are loved and praised

Lesser still are hated, and obeyed through fear

And the least are despised and ignored

If
you would lead people, trust them to do the right thing

When a leader accomplishes something using the tao

He steps back, moves on to something else

And lets the people praise themselves

Very Great Leaders

Very great leaders in their domains

are only known to exist.

Those next best are beloved and praised.

The lesser are feared and despised.

Therefore when faith is insufficient

and there is disbelief,

it is from the high value placed on words.

Works are accomplished, tasks are completed,

and ordinary folk all say

they are acting spontaneously.

The best government is one in which its citizens are unaware of its existence.

The next best rewards the citizens so that they are loyal.

A worse one, make the citizens fear.

The worst causes them to rebel.

Because such rulers lose credibility therefore people no longer trust them.

Take it easy and never abuse the power.

This will make rulers more successful and satisfied.

In turn, the citizen would praise such rulers who make them at ease.

The best ruler is one of whose existence the people are barely aware.

Next comes one whom they love and praise.

Next comes one whom they fear.

Next comes one whom they despise and defy.

When sincerity is not enough, there is lack of faith.

With the ruler who is cautious and scanty of words, when his work is done and things are accomplished, all the people say, "We ourselves have naturally achieved it!"

The highest, is known by ...

The next, known by his love.

The next, known by his fierceness.

Then, known by his rudeness.

He who does not trust, will not be trusted.

Actions, deeds, performed, no word can describe, just fine.

The best leader is one whose existence

is barely known by the people.

Next comes one whom they love and praise.

Next comes one they fear.

Next comes one they defy.

If
you do not trust enough, you will not be trusted.

True
Persons do not offer words lightly.

When their task is accomplished

and their work is completed,

the people say, "It happened to us naturally."

A
master's existence

is rarely known.

A good person's presence

is widely known

and praised and imitated.

A person who collects power

scares others and makes them fearful, small and hateful.

Without total trust

there is no trust.

Better to have

no trust

and accept everything.

Without
talking-about

without writing-about

a master takes action.

When it is done

everyone says

it just happened

naturally.

Of the best the people hardly ever know they exist;

The next best they flock to and praise for nothing.

The next they shrink from;

the next get reviled.

"Not believing people you turn them into liars" -

such bosses don't command the people's faith.

They lose faith in them and take to oaths!

The
wise man is a clever ruler; he values his words highly.

It's so hard to get a single word from at any price that when his task is finished,
a work well done, everyone says,

"It happened by itself, and we did it."

Preeminent is one whose subjects barely know he exists;

The next is one to whom they feel close and praise;

The next is one whom they fear;

The lowest is one whom they despise.

When the ruler's trust is wanting,

there will be no trust in him.

Cautious, he values his words.

When his work is completed and his affairs finished,

the common people say, "We are like this by ourselves."

In the first age of mankind the people recognized their superiors.

In the second age they served and flattered them.

In the third age they feared them,

In the fourth age they despised them.

Where faith is lacking it does not inspire confidence.

How careful were they in their expressions!

When they had done a good thing they would say, "How very natural we are!"

With Freedom and with Joy

If your beloved becomes dependent on you

resentment will follow.

If your beloved is in awe of you

it may feel good

but is very dangerous.

If your beloved sings your praises far and wide

it seems wonderful,

but disappointment lurks just around the corner.

Best of all is for your beloved to respond to you

with freedom and with joy,

to grow in confidence and strength,

and to become capable of great accomplishments.

You allow this to occur by your gifts

of trust, assurance, and freedom.

Of course we enjoy each other's praise.

It can be part of a healthy joyous relationship.

But be careful of behaving in ways

that are calculated to generate

praise or dependence.

You are not each other's audience

for the playing out of ego dreams.

You are each other's beloved.

The best (rulers) are those whose existence is (merely) known by the
people. The next best are those who are loved and praised. The next are
those who are feared. And the next are those who are despised.

It is only when one does not have enough faith in others that others will have no faith in him.

(The great rulers) value their words highly. They accomplish their
task; they complete their work. Nevertheless their people say that they
simply follow Nature.

A leader is
best

When people barely know that he exists,

Not so good when people obey and acclaim him,

Worst when they despise him.

'Fail to honor people,

They fail to honor you;'

But of a good leader, who talks little,

When his work is done, his aim fulfilled,

They will all say, 'We did this ourselves.'

The best ruler, the people do not feel his presence.

The second best, the people love and praise him.

The third best, the people fear him.

The worst, the people insult him.

If a ruler does not fully trust his people,

The people will not trust him.

A good ruler lets his people be free and rarely gives orders.

So, when things are accomplished, the people say,

"This is what we are suppose to do."

The supreme leader is one whose existence is barely known.

Next best is one who is loved and praised.

Next is one who is feared.

The last is one who is contemned.

No trust will ever be accorded to a leader who lacks integrity.

Therefore, with deep commitment,

Honor your words and trust the words of others.

Then, when the work is done and success achieved,

The people will say, "We did it ourselves."

The best king rules so that people know that "there is a king."

The less wise king rules so that he is praised and loved.

The still less wise king rules so that he is feared.

The worst king rules so that he is cursed.

He who abides by nothing,

Who rules by saying and doing nothing misleading,

Achieves such political success that people all think

They are just following their own nature.

When the Master governs, the people

are hardly aware that he exists.

Second best is a leader who is loved.

Next, is one who is feared.

The worst is one who is despised.

Such as these have no faith in their people,

and the people in turn become unfaithful to them.

The Master doesn't talk; he acts.

How sparing he is with his words!

When his work is complete and the purpose is achieved,

the people regard the triumph as their own.

