===== Chapter 37 =====

The Tao is always not "doing"

And yet nothing is not done.

Lords and kings, if they could maintain it—

The ten-thousand things would transform themselves.

Transformed, [should] they yet desire to "act"

I would cool them with the simplicity of the Nameless.

The simplicity of the Nameless

A man would also not desire.

[By] not desiring [and] by means of stillness

The world shall stabilize itself.

Tao endures without a name, Yet nothing is left undone.

If kings and lords could possess it, All beings would transform
themselves. Transformed, they desire to create; I quiet them through
nameless simplicity. Then there is no desire.

No desire is serenity, An the world settles of itself.

Tao invariably takes no action

Yet there is nothing left undone.

If kings and lords could follow it

The myriad things would transform by themselves.

And should they wish to take action once more

I'd quiet them

With nameless simplicity.

The nameless simplicity

Is like uncut wood:

It has no desires.

Without desires there is tranquility

And heaven and earth become stable by themselves.

NEVER DOING

Tao never does, Yet through it, All Things are done.

If leaders observed this, All would develop naturally.

Desire for active doing would be restrained by the inherent simplicity of Tao.

Being free of desire, Stillness and tranquility reign.

Of itself, All Things are at peace.

The Tao is eternal not doing (wu wei) yet does everything.

When all people can uphold it, ten-thousand things (everything) will naturally evolve.

When I am influenced by deep-seated desires, I will restrain them without naming them in order to keep my purity.

By focusing on the uncarved block of wood or the uncut jade, the master will be without deep-seated desires.

Without deep-seated desires there is tranquility in Heaven below (the sacred body) and peace follows.

THE RIGHT USE OF GOVERNMENT

The Tao proceedeth by its own nature, doing nothing; therefore there is

no doing which it comprehendeth not.

If
kings and princes were to govern in this manner, all things would

operate aright by their own motion.

If
this transmutation were my object, I should call it Simplicity.

Simplicity hath no name nor purpose; silently and at ease all things go

well.

The tao in its regular course does nothing (for the sake of doing it), and so there is nothing which it does not do. If princes and kings were able to maintain it, all things would of themselves be transformed by them. If this transformation became to me an object of desire, I would express the desire by the nameless simplicity.

Simplicity without a name. Is free from all external aim. With no desire, at rest and still, All things go right as of their will.

The Eternal Creating does nothing

And yet it does everything

If leaders would give in to it

The aspect of the world would change of itself

But since people have so much to wish for

Only I can be an example

The example of true simplicity

And when the people decide to follow me

The whole world will be in peace

Nature never acts, yet it activates everything.

If legislators and administrators would behave likewise, each thing would develop in accordance with its own nature. Just as, when things develop, those which become passionate are restrained by that passionless one which activates them,

So the way to restrain men's passions is by dispassionate restraint. And thus all passions will subside.

Tao never does;

Yet through it all things are done.

If the barons and kings would but possess themselves of it,

The ten thousand creatures would at once be transformed.

And if having been transformed they should desire to act,

We must restrain them by the blankness of the Unnamed.

The blankness of the Unnamed

Brings dispassion;

To be dispassionate is to be still.

And so, of itself, the whole empire will be at rest.

Tao does nothing yet nothing remains undone.

When a noble man observes this

the ten thousand things are transformed.

When the desire to act re-emerges,

it is stilled by the nameless no-thing.

Without things there is no desire.

Without desire there is stillness.

In stillness, the realm of heaven and earth is perfect.

The way always takes no action

Yet nothing remains undone

If leaders & sovereigns were able to grasp this

The myriad beings would evolve by themselves

Evolve and then want to flourish

We can then temper this

with the original nature of namelessness

(With) the original nature of namelessness

Then these too would be without ambition

Being free of ambition is the way to stillness

Nature will then arrange itself

Quieting the heart

Tao is constantly nameless,

Were kings and lords able to maintain it,

The ten thousand things would tranform on their own.

Having transformed, were their desires to become active,

I would subdue them with the nameless simplicity.

Having subdued them with the nameless simplicity,

I would not disgrace them.

By not being disgraced, they will be tranquil.

And Heaven and Earth will

of themselves be correct and right.

Eternal Tao doesn't do anything, yet it leaves nothing undone.

If you abide by it, everything in existence will transform itself. When, in the process of self-transformation, desires are aroused, calm them with nameless simplicity.

When desires are dissolved in the primal presence, peace and harmony naturally occur, and the world orders itself.

Unforced action, constant and eternal:

Tao ceaselessly moves,

But appears to be still.

When the hearts of the president

And the power-broker perceive

And accept this truth,

It will be the dawn of an era

Of transformation.

Throughout this evolution,

If the old impish projections

Of manipulative action appear,

They could be firmly dispersed

With the aid of the Primal Presence-

The nameless, formless One-

The teaching Heart of liberation

From attachment.

Could these magnates just renounce,

Once and for all,

Their old habitual attachments,

Then like a clear and cleansing rain,

Peace would fall on man and Nature.

With this poem, Lao Tzu comes to the end of the first half of the Tao Te Ching. This is the part of the book that is called "Tao," while the second half is called "Te." It is a matter of emphasis more than content: Te is, of course, introduced in the first half of the book, and Tao is never far from Lao Tzu's mind throughout the work as a whole. But, as will be seen, the concept of Te is brought into a detailed light in Part Two, whereas Tao has been the primary subject of the poetic dance in Part One.

Lao Tzu closes Part One with two poems, Chapters 36 and 37, that present an overview of the same process, wherein the student of the Sage approaches the journey of inner diminishment—the exposure, unraveling, and discarding of ego, in both its personal and societal contexts. It is the process of joining in partnership with the "teaching heart of liberation from attachment"—the Sage—and beginning the work of exposing and identifying what is inflated, powerful, holy ("enshrined" in Chapter 36), and saturated. Then the work of dissolving and transforming these projections, and freeing the true self from their influence, is undertaken: this is the "movement that appears to be still" of Chapter 37, the "subtle discernment" of Chapter 36, which "undermines the rigidity of power."

Tao never acts directly;

it activates everything.

If rulers would do likewise,

the world would improve of itself.

But
when improving, motives show.

These should be restrained by motiveless Yin.

Motiveless
Yin is free of all desire.

Being free of desire is to be serene.

Being serene, the world is at peace.

The Tao – eternally actionless and the cause of all action!

Were princes and monarchs able to acquiesce the myriad existences would by degrees spontaneously transform. Transforming and wishing to function I would immediately guide by the simplicity of the nameless.

The simplicity of the nameless is akin to desirableness.

Desireless and at rest the world would naturally become peaceful.

Tao is ever inactive, and yet there is nothing that it does not do.

If princes and kings could keep to it, all things would of themselves become developed. When they are developed, desire would stir in them; I would restrain them by the nameless Simplicity, In order to make them free from desire.

Free from desire, they would be at rest; And the world would of itself become rectified. However insignificant Simplicity seems, the whole world cannot make it submissive. If princes and kings could keep to it, All things in the world would of themselves pay homage. Heaven and earth would unite to send down sweet dew. The people with no one to command them would of themselves become harmonious. When merits are accomplished and affairs completed, The people would speak of themselves as following nature.

Non-Deeming Action

Some guide treats lacking deeming-action as a constant

yet everything is deem-acted.

If fief-holding kings could preserve this,

all the natural kinds would come to self transformation.

If they transform and desire to construct,

I will mollify them with the nameless uncarved wood.

Nameless uncarved wood is,

in general also being on the point of lacking desires.

If we use not desiring to get calm,

the social world will be on the point of self-fixing.

Book II

De

virtuosity

Tao is real and free from action, yet nothing is not acted upon.

If rulers abide with it, all things transmute by themselves.

If, in the process of transmutation, intention emerges, it must be overcome by the original non-differentiation of the nameless.

To experience the original non-differentiation of the nameless, one should also be free from intending to have no-intention.

To be free from intending to have no-intention is to be quiescent.

Thereby, the world is naturally led to tranquillity.

The Tao always does nothing but nothing remains undone.

If the ruler observes this the myriad creatures will act of their own accord.

After their metamorphosis, desire will arise.

It will press them down with the power of the uncarved block, the Tao.

The nameless uncarved block is free from desire.

Absence of desire will lead to stillness and the world under Heaven will be harmonized by itself.

The Tao is constant and nameless.

If marquises and kings can adhere to it,

The ten thousand things will live and grow spontaneously.

While they live and grow spontaneously,

If lusts arise,

I shall fill them with the nameless unhewn log.

Being filled with the nameless unhewn log,

They shall become lustless.

Lustlessness leads to stillness;

Heaven and earth shall turn aright spontaneously.

Tao is never active, but there is nothing it does not do.

If princes and kings could hold onto it, all things would develop by themselves.

When they develop, the desire in them would emerge,

I would restrain them with simplicity,

So simple that it does not even have a name,

In order to liberate them from desire.

Free of desire, they would be soaked in tranquillity,

And thus the world would attain purity and virtue.

Simplicity, however unimportant it may be,

Cannot be subdued even by the entire world.

If princes and kings could hold onto it,

Everything in the world, of its own accord, would pay homage.

Heaven and earth would unite to sprinkle dew, sweeter than honey, on the ground.

Without anyone ordering them to do so, people would attain harmony by themselves.

With the mission accomplished and the objectives achieved,

People would see themselves as following in nature's footsteps.

The way never acts, yet nothing is left undone.

Should lords and princes be able to hold fast to it,

The myriad creatures will be transformed of their own accord.

After they are transformed, should desire raise its head,

I shall press it down with the weight of the nameless uncarved block.

The nameless uncarved block

Is but freedom from desire,

And if I cease to desire and remain still,

The empire will be at peace of its own accord.

Administration of Government

Reason always practises non-assertion, and there is nothing that remains undone.

If princes and kings could keep Reason, the ten thousand creatures would of themselves be reformed. While being reformed they might yet be anxious to stir; but I would restrain them by the simplicity of the Ineffable.

"The simplicity of the unexpressed

Will purify the heart of lust.

Is there no lust there will be rest,

And all the world will thus be blest."

The Tao never does anything, yet there is nothing it doesn't do. If a father instills this virtue into his being, the children will be transformed by themselves, in accordance with their nature. Following their nature, their contentment is total and no desires would arise. When no desire arises, bliss and tranquility abide.

Direction is laissez-faire at all times; it is all-permeating.

Were a Duke or a Prince to govern with Direction,

Myriad matters would develop on own volition.

As self-development degenerates into avarice in complexity,

I suppress it with Direction's simplicity.

Suppressing with Direction's simplicity,

avarice disappears.

Without avarice, serenity visits with ease;

The world self-governs in peace.

Way is perennially doing nothing so there's nothing it doesn't do.

When lords and emperors abide by this

the ten thousand things follow change of themselves.

Desire drives change,

but I've stilled it with uncarved nameless simplicity.

Uncarved nameless simplicity

is the perfect absence of desire,

and the absence of desire means repose:

all beneath heaven at rest of itself.

Tao forever takes no action but nothing is left undone.

If barons and kings were able to keep faith in it,

All things will transform spontaneously on their own.

Should selfish desires arise anew,

I shall counter them with natural goodness yet unnamed.

What the unnamed natural goodness brings,

Is but the riddance of selfish desires.

Riddance of selfish desires will bring forth tranquility,

Then peace would naturally prevail in the world.

Tao,
entirely absent of acting

Yet is absent of being without acting.

If
nobles and kings are able to keep to it

The 10000 things attain self-transformation

Transforming yet desiring to do.

When
I am able to calm the restless

An absence of naming true nature happens.

With
an absence of naming true nature

In the end an absence of desire is also obtained

Without desire tranquillity happens

The world attains self-settlement.

The Principle is always non-acting (not acting actively), and yet it does everything (without seeming to participate).

If the prince and the lords could govern like that (without poking their fingers in it), all beings would become spontaneously perfect (by returning to nature). It would only remain to call them back to unnamed nature (to the primordial simplicity of the Principle) each time they showed any tendency to come out of this state (by acting). In this state of unnamed nature there are no desires.

When there are no desires all is peaceful, and the state is governed by itself.

The Tao is constant in non-action

Yet there is nothing it does not do

If the sovereign can hold on to this

All things shall transform themselves

Transformed, yet wishing to achieve

I shall restrain them with the simplicity of the nameless

The simplicity of the nameless

They shall be without desire

Without desire, using stillness

The world shall steady itself

The Tao is the eternal, unchanging principle of effortless achievements. Within the workings of the Tao there is no strife and no struggle.

The Tao is both eternally devoid of action and the ultimate cause of all actions. The Tao makes no attempt to achieve, and yet nothing is beyond its powers to achieve. The Tao doesn't try to do anything; it simply does everything.

If a ruler (anything from the leader of a nation to the master of one's own self) is able to hold on to this principle and embody it, then everything around him or her (people, circumstances, relationships) will naturally transform themselves into alignment with him or her.

Once transformed in this manner and aligned with the ruler, the people may want to move ahead with action which, if unchecked, can lead to chaos. Similarly, those who become allies in our cause may do more harm than good out of zeal, or a strong desire to take some sort of action. Our own thoughts and emotions, once aligned with a personal goal, may also get away from us out of sheer enthusiasm.

In these situations, we can restore balance by applying the concept of p'u, or the principle of plainness and simplicity. The fundamental nature of the nameless Tao is plain and simple. This total absence of contrivance and complexity, if understood, can lead to a lessening of the urge to overact. This moderating effect can in turn lead to stillness.

This stillness, quietness and tranquility will bring everything and everyone back into balance. Thus the environment becomes naturally settled and peaceful - in tune with the Tao.

ADMINISTERING THE GOVERNMENT

Tao is apparently inactive (wu wei) and yet nothing remains undone. If princes and kings desire to keep) everything in order, they must first reform themselves. (If princes and kings would follow the example of Tao, then all things will reform themselves.) If they still desire to change, I would pacify them by the simplicity of the ineffable Tao.

This simplicity will end desire, and if desire be absent there is quietness. All people will of themselves be satisfied.

Tao everlasting (ch'ang) does not act (wu wei),

And yet nothing is not done (erh wu pu wei).

If kings and barons can abide by (shou) it,

The ten thousand things will transform by themselves (tzu hua).

If in transforming desire (yü) is aroused,

I shall suppress it by the nameless uncarved wood (p'u).

With the nameless uncarved wood,

There shall be no desire (wu yü).

Without desire there is thus quietude (ching).

The world shall be self-ordered (tzu ting).

Tao never acts directly; it activates erverything. If rulers would do likewise the world would improve if itself.

But when improving, motives show. These should be restrained by motiveless Yin. Motiveless Yin is free of all desire, and being free of desire is to be serene. Being serene, the world is at peace.

The Tao never acts, yet through it everything gets done.

If rulers could reside in the Tao,

everything would fall into place all by itself.

Action is restrained by the Tao.

Action restrained, no desire.

No desire: tranquillity.

All things at peace.

Thirty-seven

Tao abides in non-action,

Yet nothing is left undone.

If kings and lords observed this,

The ten thousand things would develop naturally.

If they still desired to act,

They would return to the simplicity of formless substance.

Without form there is no desire.

Without desire there is tranquility.

And in this way all things would be at peace.

The Tao always remains inactive,

Yet it acts upon everything in the world.

If lords and kings can keep it,

All creatures will grow and develop naturally.

When desires are kindled in the growth and development,

I can suppress them with the nameless Simplicity of the Tao.

Once I do so

Desires will be repressed.

Once desires are repressed,

The whole world will be naturally at peace.

Tao never does,

Yet leaves nothing undone.

If kings and princes hold fast to this,

The ten thousand things will transform of themselves.

Should desires arise after transformation,

I shall calm them with the nameless, uncarved block.

The nameless, uncarved block

Brings desirelessness.

With desirelessness comes stillness,

And all under Heaven will be at peace by itself.

Dao always sticks to non-action, yet everything develops spontaneously.

If the rulers could follow the way of Dao,

Everything under the sun will function properly.

If desire begins to creep in during the developing process,

It should be constrained by the "nameless simplicity".

The "nameless simplicity" has no designs.

Without designs, it will not create any disturbance.

Hence, peace will again prevail in the world.

The Way of Government

Wei Cheng

Tao is eternal and devoid of action,

Yet there is nothing it does not do.

If kings and nobles can preserve it intact,

The ten thousand things will reform of themselves.

If after the reform they desire to be active,

I shall calm them with the Nameless Simplicity (p'u),

The Nameless Simplicity will induce desirelessness,

Desirelessness will tend to quiescence,

And the world will set itself on the right course.

The Tao is eternally inactive;

Yet nothing is left undone.

If kings and princes grasped this truly

All creatures would develop of themselves.

And if, as they developed, desires stirred within them,

I would curb them by the Simplicity-without-a-name.

This Simplicity-without-a-name leads to detachment from desire;

Detachment from desire leads to stillness.

And in this way the world, of itself, would reach Peace.

Tao never does anything,

And everything gets done.

If rulers can keep to it,

The ten thousand things will changes of themselves.

Changed, things may start to stir.

Quiet them with the namelessly simple,

Which alone will bring no-desire.

No-desire: then there is peace,

And beneath-heaven will settle down of itself.

The subtle essence of the universe is always unoccupied,

yet it leaves nothing undone.

If the people of the world were wise enough to plant the root of their lives deep within the Subtle Origin,

then the worldly affairs of life would coherently follow their own natural course,

and harmony would abound of its own accord.

When confusion takes place in one's surroundings,

it can be dissolved with the power of undisturbable Simplicity.

When life is ruled by undisturbable Simplicity,

desire and passion naturally fall away and reveal people's true, original nature.

Then the peaceful order of the universe prevails and unity manifests again of its own accord.

XXXVII.

To
Induce Good Government

The
Tao eternally non-acts, and so

It
does nothing and yet there is nothing left to do;

If
prince or king could keep it, all would change

Of
their own accord with a transformation strange.

And
so transformed, should desire to change again still come to be,

I
would quiet such desire by the Nameless One s simplicity,

But
the Nameless One s simplicity is free from all desire,

So
tranquilly, of their own accord, all things would still transpire.

The activity of Everlasting Tao is in the Inner Kingdom,

It does not act except through the innermost.

If prince and people can maintain it together,

All beings will be transformed from within themselves;

Being transformed, they again desire action.

We must learn to still desire

To obtain in the Inner Life Purity of the Name.

Purity of the Name in the Inner Life

Brings absence of desire;

Absence of desire brings stillness;

Thus shall the world be perfected from within itself.

Tao
(the Laws of the Universe) never makes

any
showiness,

And
yet it

does
everything.

If
a ruler can

stick
to it,

All
things will

grow
of themselves.

When
they have

grown
and

tend
to make an excitement,

It
is time to keep them

in
their place

by
the aid of

the
nameless First Simplicity.

Which
alone can

control
the desires

of
people.

When
the desires

of
people

are
limited,

there
will be peace,

And
the world

will
settle down

of
its own agreement.

The Way is constantly inactive and yet there is nothing that remains undone.

If the vassal kings could abide by this, the ten thousand things would develop of themselves. If in this development desire should stir, I would suppress it by the (natural) simplicity of the nameless.

Insignificant though the (natural) simplicity may be, none in All-under-heaven can enslave it.

If the vassal kings could abide by this, the ten thousand things would flock to them of themselves. Heaven and earth would unite to send down sweet dew and the people, at no one's command, would spontaneously share alike.

Truly, they would become without desire. Being without desire they would be quiet, and All-under-heaven would of itself be settled.

The Tao in its regular course does nothing (for the sake of

doing it), and so there is nothing which it does not do.

If
princes and kings were able to maintain it, all things would of

themselves be transformed by them.

If
this transformation became to me an object of desire, I would

express the desire by the nameless simplicity.

Simplicity
without a name

Is free from all external aim.

With no desire, at rest and still,

All things go right as of their will.

THOU art eternally nameless.
If rulers and Kings preserved it, the masses
would transform.
After transformation, should they wish to rise-up,

I could restrain them with the nameless unhewn log.
Should I so restrain
them, they would not feel disgraced;
they would be still, whereupon Heaven
and Earth would right themselves.

Only
see you're doing nothing

Yet not a thing is left undone

For all things happen on their own

In you who are the all in one

If
leaders could be centered

All ten thousand things would thrive

By seeing what is natural

All creation comes alive

Everyone
would be content

With living simply every day

Desires would be moderate

And peace would be the only way

TAO never makes any ado,

And yet it does everything.

If a ruler can cling to it,

All things will grow of themselves.

When they have grown and tend to make a stir,

It is time to keep them in their place by the aid of the nameless Primal Simplicity,

Which alone can curb the desires of men.

When the desires of men are curbed, there will be peace,

And the world will settle down of its own accord.

The Tao does not do anything purely for the sake of action.

Yet all it does is perfect and complete.

If the ruler of a land were to be able to center in the Tao,

all would work in accord and harmony.

People would be content with simple lives, free from desire and conflict.

The Tao never acts with force,

yet there is nothing that it can not do.

If
rulers could follow the way of the Tao,

then all of creation would willingly follow their example.

If selfish desires were to arise after their transformation,

I would erase them with the power of the Uncarved Block.

By
the power of the Uncarved Block,

future generations would lose their selfish desires.

By losing their selfish desires,

the world would naturally settle into peace.

It puzzles people at first, to see how little the able leader actually does, and yet how much gets done.

But the Leader knows that is how things work. After all, Tao does nothing at all, yet everything gets done.

When the leader gets too busy, the time has come to return to selfless silence.

Selflessness gives one center.

Center creates order.

When there is order, there is little to do.

The Tao never "acts"

Yet nothing is left undone.

If the governments and leaders would keep it

All things would of their own accord be transformed.

Should desires arise from transformation

I shal influence them through silent simplicity.

Silent simplicity involves being free from desires.

When you are without desire you are content

And All the World is at peace.

Infinity
is the essence of all things.

Without intention, It manifests all things.

If
leaders and kings

remain focused on the oneness of Infinity,

nations will flow in peace and harmony.

If
leaders and kings are compelled to act,

they should focus on Infinity

and refuse to manifest desire.

If
there is no desire for action,

the world would flow in the peace and harmony

of the oneness of Infinity.

Tao does nothing, and there is nothing it does not do.

If a Monarch can uphold it, all things will reform naturally.

As they reform, and desires arose,

I would calm them with Nameless Simplicity,

for Nameless Simplicity lessens desire.

Not desiring promotes Peace beneath Heaven,

and things beneath Heaven will stabilize.

The Tao never acts,

Yet nothing is left undone.

If the ruler were able to hold to it,

The Ten Thousand Things would take shape of their own accord.

If in taking shape desire should arise,

He would quell it by means of the nameless simplicity.

With the nameless simplicity

There will be no desires.

Being free from desire, tranquillity is attained,

And everything beneath Heaven will be at peace.

The eternal Way serves everything by doing nothing.

If the kings can keep the model,

A natural order will appear in the world.

Should something undesirable grow after that,

Prevent it with the nameless simplicity.

By saying "the nameless simplicity,"

I mean the reduction of vain desires.

Vain desires can be reduced by serenity of mind,

And the world can then be back in the Way.

Tao invariably Does Nothing, and nothing remains not done

If the princes and kings can watch over it the thousands of things will change by themselves.

Not being disgraced, they will be still. The world will order itself.

Tao does not act in the world of matter.* Yet the entire creation is a product of its creativity.

Act you too in the same manner, and then all the living will develop in the natural way!

When you live with simplicity, without paying attention to gossips and hostile attitude, in harmony with Tao, then you come to the state when you have no attachments and passions.

The absence of worldly desires brings one to the state of inner calm — and then everything around comes to order.

* It is Te that acts.

The Tao Way looks inactive, but everything is accomplished.

If Leaders will follow, the world will be harmonized by itself.

For solutions to multitude of problems, simplicity has to be followed.

Simplicity will diminish the number of wishes.

Having little wishes this brings tranquillity.

Without many wishes, the world harmonizes itself.

The
Dao never employs forceful action yet there is nothing it fails to do. If the
lords and rulers can hold to it, then the myriad creatures will transform themselves
of their own accord. Should desire rise up [even] after they have transformed,
I will tranquilize it with the nameless Uncarved Block. [By reason of] the nameless
Uncarved Block, the [myriad creatures] too will in future become desireless.
Their having been stilled by desirelessness, the world will become settled of
its own accord.

Tao is always inactive.

But it leaves nothing undone.

If dukes and kings can keep it,

Then all things will be naturally transformed.

If transformation raises desires,

I would suppress them with nameless simplicity.

Nameless simplicity means being without desires.

Being without desires and with tranquility,

The world will keep peace by itself.

The Power in Desirelessness

The Tao never acts,

And yet is never inactive.

If leaders can hold on to it,

All Things will be naturally influenced.

Influenced and yet desiring to act,

I would calm them with Nameless Simplicity.

Nameless Simplicity is likewise without desire;

And without desire there is harmony.

The world will then be naturally stabilized.

The Dao has no agenda. So at the end of the day, everything is done. The man that lives in this lives in a peaceful and harmonious home.

The Way is always still, at rest,

And yet does everything that's done.

If then the king and nobles could

Retain its potency for good,

The creatures all would be transformed.

But
if, the change once made in them,

They still inclined to do their work,

I should restrain them then

By means of that unique

Original simplicity

Found in the Virgin Block,

Which brings disinterest,

With stillness in its train,

And so, an ordered world.

Tao invariably does nothing,

And yet there is nothing left undone.

If kings and princes can preserve it,

All things will submit to them spontaneously.

(After their) submission if any desires occur,

I should subdue them with the nameless simplicity.

The nameless simplicity is nothing but eradication of desires.

Eradication of desires will lead to quietude.

Thus the world will naturally find its equilibrium.

The Dao in its constancy engages in no conscious action,

Yet nothing remains undone.

If any lord or prince could hold on to it, the myriad folk would undergo moral transformation spontaneously.

Once nurtured, should desire arise, I would press down on it with the nameless uncarved block.

With the nameless uncarved block, they too would stay free of desire.

Achieving tranquillity by keeping them free of desire, all under Heaven would govern themselves.

1. The Dao is constantly nameless.

2. Were Marquises and kings able to maintain it,

3. The ten thousand things would transform on their own.

4. Having transformed, were their desires to become active,

5. I would subdue them with the nameless simplicity.

6. Having subdued them with the nameless simplicity,

7. I would not disgrace them.

8. By not being disgraced, they will be tranquil.

9. And Heaven and Earth will of themselves be correct and right.

10.
The Way—2,426 [characters]

Tao never does
anything

but nothing is left undone.

If our leaders
could get in touch with Tao,

the world would take care of itself.

Even if they wanted to make their own changes,

they'd be drawn back to Tao's nameless simplicity.

When our lives
are that simple, we want for nothing.

We can relax, and the world becomes a better place.

PART TWO

TE (POWER)

.

The Way Never Interferes

The Way never interferes,

yet through it everything is done.

If leaders would follow the Way,

the world would be reformed of its own accord.

When reformed and desiring to act,

let them be restrained by what is simply natural.

Undefined simplicity is free of desires.

Being free of desires, it is serene;

and the world finds peace of its own accord.

TAO does not do anything and yet leaves nothing undone.

Where the rulers do the same all will turn out for the best.

And where the manifoldness of cravings and desires stirs attachment to the ONE will tame them.

Attachment to the ONE makes man desireless

Desireless produces calm

Calm produces order.

The World In Peace

Lao Tze says,

The Tao's accomplishment is constantly made through acting without the intent to control fate, yet leaving nothing undone.

If the king of men insists on practicing the Tao, all existence will transform themselves in their natural courses.

When they transform and go out of their way, the king of men should guide them back to a pristine simplicity which was unknown to the world before.

Namely, the pristine simplicity of being desireless.

To be desireless is cultivated by being still.

It is by this stillness that this world is settled down in peace naturally.

THE EXERCISE OF LEADERSHIP

The
way of nature is not contrived,

yet nothing which is required

is left undone.

Observing
nature, the wise leader knows this,

and replaces desire with dispassion,

thus saving that energy, otherwise spent,

which has not been wasted away.

The
wise leader knows

his actions must be

without the use of forced energy.

He
knows that more

is still required,

for he also knows

that he must act

without deliberate intent,

of having no intention.

To
act without contrived intent

is to act without contriving,

and is the way of nature,

and so is the way of the Tao.

The Tao never does anything,

yet through it all things are done.

If powerful men and women

could venter themselves in it,

the whole world would be transformed

by itself, in its natural rhythms.

People would be content

with their simple, everyday lives,

in harmony, and free of desire.

When there is no desire,

all things are at peace.

Section: Te

The eternity of Dao contrives nothing, yet it provides everything.

If rulers can cling to it - Dao,

All Things will transform (change) themselves.

Any artificial desire occurring during the transformation, shall be suppressed by the nameless "Purity" (Pure Matter).

Nameless "Purity" (Pure Matter) will do away with artificial desires.

When artificial desires have been done away with, all peoples will be at peace and the world order will be established automatically.

Tao is eternally nameless.

If lords and rulers would abide by it,

All things would evolve of themselves.

What evolves desires to act.

I, then, suffuse this with nameless simplicity.

Suffusing with nameless simplicity is eliminating humiliation.

Without humiliation, peace arises.

Heaven and earth regulate themselves.

XXXVII

The
tao is ever nameless

If leaders could be one with it

The world would transform itself

Wherever it is restless and troubled

It could be soothed by simple anonymous actions

Which, being anonymous,

Would cause no disgrace, no insult, no worries

And all of heaven and earth would find its own proper balance

The Way Is Always Uncontrived

The Way is always uncontrived,

yet there's nothing it doesn't do.

If lords and monarchs could keep to

it, all beings would evolve spontaneously.

When they have evolved and want to act,

I would stabilize them with nameless simplicity.

Even nameless simplicity would not be wanted.

By not wanting, there is calm,

and the world will straighten itself.

Tao normally does not interfere, yet it plays a role everywhere.

If the kings and nobles can follow it, everything would become submissive.

If rebellion is attempted, I will use Tao's extreme honesty to suppress it.

Using Tao's extreme honesty to suppress it, people would have no ambition.

With no ambition, people would be peaceful.

Thus, the world would go back to normal.

The Way does not do, but does do (does not do nothing).

If kings and princes can cling to it, all things will change by themselves.

When they change and tend to stir, it is time to keep them in their place by the aid of the nameless uncarved.

It is the uncarved that curbs the desires.

Without desires, there will be stillness; the world will be in peace by itself.

Tao abides Wu-Wei (no action against Tao).

yet, nothing is left undone.

If kings and lords observed this,

everything would manifest naturally.

If they desired to do something (against Tao),

I would stop them with nameless pooh.

Nameless pooh has no desire.

No desire is till (invariance and eternal).

Everything will manifest according to its own path.

The Tao never strives,

yet nothing is left undone.

If leaders were able to adhere to it

the ten thousand things would develop

of their own accord.

If after they have developed

they experience desires to strive,

they can bury those desires

under the nameless Uncarved Block.

The
nameless Uncarved Block can protect

against desire.

When desires are restrained there will be peace,

and then all under heaven will be at rest.

THE
SECOND BOOK: Te (Virtue)

The
way never moves

or does anything

still, everything is done.

If politicians and priests knew this,

everything would be transformed by itself.

If
they knew this and still wanted to do something

nothing would happen.

Change would become meaningless,

desire would be lost,

nature would return

to quiet.

The dao never does; it takes no action. Through it everything is done, yet there's
nothing left undone.

If good kings and barons would master some fit dao and keep it, all things in
the world should transform spontaneously.

When reformed and rising to action, let all influenced be restrained by the
blankness of the unnamed, the nameless pristine simplicity. Yes, if after being
transformed they should desire to act, someone has to restrain them with simplicity
that has no name.

Its
an unnamed blankness; it could bring dispassion; As such nameless pristine simplicity
is stripped of desire. So to be truly, artfully dispassionate, be free of desires
and still. Simple wit and sense is free of desires.

By
stripping of desire true [yoga] rest is achieved almost of itself, the whole
[body or] empire will be at rest of its own accord. And next the world [perhaps
of somebody] could get at peace of its own accord.

The Way is eternally nameless.

If feudal lords and kings preserve it,

The myriad creatures will be transformed by themselves.

After transformation, if they wish to rise up,

I shall restrain them with the nameless unhewn log.

By restraining them with the nameless unhewn log,

They will not feel disgraced;

Not feeling disgraced,

They will be still,

Whereupon heaven and earth will be made right by themselves.

Tao remains quiescent, and yet leaves nothing undone.

If a ruler or a king could hold it, all things would of their own accord assume the desired shape.

If in the process of transformation desire should arise, I would check it by the ineffable simplicity.

The ineffable simplicity would bring about an absence of desire, and rest would come back again.

Thus the world would regenerate itself.

Natural Desires

Relationships can be distorted

by the artificial creation of desire

by those who use words

on behalf of sellers of goods.

These artificially created desires

can never be adequately satisfied

because they are not natural.

Natural desires have their fulfillment

contained within them

for they emerge from the Tao

and are satisfied by the Tao.

It may be helpful to talk some evening

about what you truly want.

Happiness?—How will you know?

Success?—How do you measure it?

Possessions?—What and why?

How is your relationship affected

by each of these desires?

Which emerge from your center

and which are imposed from without?

Consider carefully.

Tao invariably takes no action, and yet there is nothing left undone.

If kings and barons can keep it, all things will transform
spontaneously. If, after transformation, they should desire to be
active, I would restrain them with simplicity, which has no name.

Simplicity, which has no name, is free of desires, Being free of
desires, it is tranquil. And the world will be at peace of its own
accord.

The way to use
life is to do nothing through acting,

The way to use life is to do everything through being.

When a leader knows this,

His land naturally goes straight.

And the world's passion to stray from straightness

Is checked at the core

By the simple unnamable cleanness

Through which men cease from coveting,

And to a land where men cease from coveting

Peace comes of course.

The DAO always practices WUWEI, but there is nothing that it cannot do.

If the kings can use the DAO, people will take care of themselves.

When people get freedom, they begin to have desires;

I will then use this nameless and simple DAO to guide them.

This nameless and simple DAO will make them have no desires.

Without desires, they will be peaceful, and the country will keep stability by itself.

The Tao does nothing,

Yet it leaves nothing undone.

If the leaders of the world abide by it,

All beings of their own accord will transform themselves.

If in the course of self-transformation discordant desires arise,

Calm them with the unnameable simplicity of the Tao.

If calmed with the nameless simplicity of the Tao,

Discordant desires of their own accord will disappear.

If discordant desires disappear and quietude is restored,

The world of its own accord will order itself.

The eternal Way serves everything by doing nothing.

If the kings can keep the model,

A natural order will appear in the world.

Should something undesirable grow after that,

Prevent it with the nameless simplicity.

By saying "the nameless simplicity,"

I mean the reduction of vain desires.

Vain desires can be reduced by serenity of mind,

And the world can then be back in the Way.

The Tao does not do anything purely for the sake of action.

Yet all it does is perfect and complete.

If the ruler of a land were to be able to center in the Tao,

all would work in accord and harmony.

People would be content with simple lives, free from desire and conflict.

