===== Chapter 63 =====

Do [things] without "doing" [them].

Work without working.

Taste without tasting.

[Make] the great small

[And] the many few.

Respond to adversity with [this] virtue.

Seek the difficult through the easy.

Manage the great through the minute.

Difficult matters in the world must be done through the easy ones.

Great matters must be done through the minute ones.

Thus, the sages at no time do great [things].

This is the reason they can achieve the great [things].

Those who make frivolous promises are certainly bereft of sincerity.

Too much ease most certainly [results in] too much difficulty.

Therefore do the sages

[Treat things] as though they [were] difficult

And so they are, throughout [their lives], without difficulties!

Act without acting. Serve without serving. Taste without tasting.

Big, little, Many, few, Repay hatred with Te.

Map difficult with easy Approach great through narrow.

The most difficult things in the world Must be accomplished through the
easiest. The greatest things in the world Must be accomplished through
the smallest.

Therefore the Sage Never attempts great things and so accomplishes them.

Quick promises Mean little trust. Everything easy Means great difficulty.

Thus for the Sage everything is difficult, And so in the end Nothing is difficult.

Act without taking action.

Be busy without busy-ness.

Taste what cannot be tasted.

Magnify the small

Multiply the few.

Repay injury with kindness.

Prepare for the difficult while it is still easy.

Work on the big thing while it is still small.

The difficult things of the world are initially easy.

The big things of the world are initially small.

The sage does not strive to achieve great things

So he is able achieve greatness.

Those who are quick to make promises

Are bound not to be trusted.

What may seem easy

Is bound to become hard.

The sage accepts his tasks as difficult.

Therefore they all become easy for him.

THE DIFFICULT AND THE EASY

Practicing Wu-Wei,

- Act without acting.

- Work without doing.

- Taste without tasting.

Small becomes great, few becomes many,

The unkind is rewarded with kindness.

Let simplicity emerge from complication.

Dealing with trouble while still mere bother,

Resolution emerges from potential difficulty.

Truly, dealing effectively with great problems,

Requires attention before those problems achieve great magnitude.

Thus the Sage, by never dealing with problems of great magnitude,

Achieves greatness.

Glib promises can rarely be kept.

Ostensibly easy accomplishment rarely lacks difficulty of performance.

The Sage, ever mindful of difficulty,

Encounters no difficulty.

Act without doing (wu wei).

Work without working.

Taste without tasting.

Great is small, more is less.

Respond to hatred with the action of your soul.

Deal with the difficult by becoming one (with the source).

Easily become great through the exquisite.

The difficult endeavors of Heaven below (the sacred body) flourish through ease.

Heaven below's great endeavors arise from the exquisite.

Until their last day, the sage does not act great, hence can accomplish great things.

To condemn the inarticulate diminishes trust.

Changing places (becoming one with) becomes very difficult.

By means of resembling the difficulty, the sage is free of difficulty until the end of their days.

FORETHOUGHT AT THE OUTSET

Act without lust of result; work without anxiety; taste without

attachment to flavour; esteem small things great and few things many;

repel violence with gentleness.

Do
great things while they are yet small, hard things while they are yet

easy; for all things, how great or hard soever, have a beginning when

they are little and easy. So thus the wise man accomplisheth the

greatest tasks without undertaking anything important.

Who
undertaketh thoughtlessly is certain to fail in attainment; who

estimateth things easy findeth them hard. The wise man considereth even

easy things hard, so that even hard things are easy to him.

(It is the way of the Tao) to act without (thinking of) acting; toconduct affairs without (feeling the) trouble of them; to taste withoutdiscerning any flavour; to consider what is small as great, and a few asmany; and to recompense injury with kindness. (The master of it) anticipatesthings that are difficult while they are easy, and does things that wouldbecome great while they are small. All difficult things in the world aresure to arise from a previous state in which they were easy, and all greatthings from one in which they were small. Therefore the sage, while henever does what is great, is able on that account to accomplish the greatestthings. He who lightly promises is sure to keep but little faith; he whois continually thinking things easy is sure to find them difficult. Thereforethe sage sees difficulty even in what seems easy, and so never has anydifficulties.

Act without intention

Stop labouring

Just enjoy life

One who doesn't honour something small

Isn't worthy of something big

No more eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth

Turn to them your other cheek

Discover that what seems complicated is in fact very simple

See the grandeur in what seems insignificant

Don't turn simplicity into complexity

Living purely is simple

But people have made it complicated

So one who's wise will never make trouble

And therefore he can move mountains

One who promises a lot is hardly ever trustworthy

One with a lot of blinkers on will bring to pass lots of troubles

But one who is wise looks before he leaps

Therefore he won't start at all

And because of that he knows no trouble

Act disinterestedly - without intending that your action shall change the course of Nature. Behave indifferently - without trying to impose your own ideas upon the lives of others. Appreciate natural flavours - without adulterating natural foods with artificial flavours.

Accept the fact that what is small grows big, and what are few become many. Respond intelligently even to unintelligent treatment.

Take care of what is difficult while it is still easy, and deal with what will become big while it is yet small; For all difficult things originate in what is easy.

The most difficult things in the world Must be accomplished through the easiest. The greatest things in the world Must be accomplished through the smallest.

Therefore the intelligent man, although never troubling himself with big things, still accomplishes the same result (by dealing with them when they are small)

He who is careless about things when they are easy will have to face them when they become difficult.

Therefore the intelligent man, although dealing with things which will become difficult, does so by attending to them while they are not difficult.

It acts without action, does without doing,

Finds flavour in what is flavourless,

Can make the small great and the few many,

"Requites injuries with good deeds,

Deals with the hard while it is still easy,

With the great while it is still small."

In the governance of empire everything difficult

Must be dealt with while it is still easy,

Everything great must be dealt with while it is still small.

Therefore the Sage never has to deal with the great;

And so achieves greatness.

But again "Light assent inspires little confidence

And 'many easies' means many a hard."

Therefore the Sage knows too how to make the easy difficult,

And by doing so avoid all difficulties!

Perform not-doing.

Work without motive.

Savor what has no flavor.

Regard the small as great, the few as many.

Repay injury with compassion.

See simplicity in the complex.

See greatness in small gestures.

Confront the difficult while easy.

Do great things in small increments.

The sage does nothing great,

but great things are accomplished.

Easy promises are easily broken.

Things taken lightly become difficult.

The sage regards nothing lightly,

therefore nothing is difficult.

Act without acting

Work without working

Savor without tasting

Greatness is ordinary, much is little

Repay ill will with virtue

Plan for the complicated while it is simple

Develop the great while it is small

The difficult tasks under heaven

Always begin in simplicity

The greatest tasks under heaven

Always begin as minutiae

This is why wise ones never assume greatness

And so can achieve such greatness

Those who lightly promise will surely be less trusted

Much ease is surely much difficulty

This is why wise ones look for things to get complicated

And so in the end have no complications at all

Work

Act without acting.

Serve without corncern for affairs.

Find flavor in what has no flavor.

Regard the small as large, and the few as many.

And repay resentment with kindness.

Plan for the difficult while it is easy;

Act on the large when it is minute.

The most difficult things in the world

Begin as things that are easy.

The most difficult things in the world

Arise from the minute.

Therefore the sage, to the end,

Does not strive to do the great.

Those who too lightly agree,

Will necessarily be trusted by few;

And those who regard many things as easy,

Will necessarily end up with many difficulties.

Therefore, the Sage always regards things as difficult,

And as a result, in the end he has no difficulty.

Act by not acting, accomplish by not straining, understand by not knowing.

Regard the humble as exalted and the exalted as humble. Remedy injury with tranquil repair.

Meet the difficult while it is still easy; cross the universe one step at a time.

Because the sage doesn't try anything too big, she's able to accomplish big things.

Those who commit lightly seldom come through. Those who think everything is easy will finmd everything hard.

The sage understands that everything is difficult, and thus in the end has no difficulties.

Act without effort,

Work but don't grind,

Savor the tasteless,

See greatness in smallness,

And the multitude in the few.

Answer evil with the firmest Modesty,

Resolve difficulty at the very beginning-

Before it becomes difficult.

For enduring greatness is achieved

In attending to incipient detail.

Nature transforms complexity:

Its greatness depends

On its infinitesimal precision.

Just so, the Cosmic Sage:

It never strives toward greatness,

It simply accomplishes it.

It is not bound by promises,

Nor moved by faith.

In the easy is the difficult surpassed.

The Sage treats the illness

Before the symptoms arise.

Thus is struggle prevented,

And heroes made extinct.

Achieve serenity. Work passively. Taste the flavorless.

Large or small, many or few, exchange love for hatred.

Undertake
the difficult while it is still simple.

Undertake the great while it is still minor.

The problems of the world must be solved

while they are easy, the great while they are minor.

The truly wise find greatness by undertaking nothing great.

A
promise lightly made is often difficult to keep.

Whoever makes light of things encounters many problems.

The truly wise know that things are difficult

and therefore meet with no difficulties.

Practice non-action. Be concerned with non-concern. Taste the flavourless. Account the small as great, and the few as many. For hatred return perfection.

Manipulate difficulties while they are easy. Take in hand great things while they are insignificant. Every difficult thing in the world had its origin in what was at first easy. Every great thing in the world was once significant. Therefore the Holy Man makes no distinctions and thus he is able to accomplish that which is great.

Small faith can be placed in promises lightly made.

The easier a matter is reckoned the more difficult it proves at the last; for this reason the Holy Man sees difficulties in everything, and therefore he encounters no difficulties.

Act non-action; undertake no undertaking; taste the tasteless.

The Sage desires the desireless, and prizes no articles that are difficult to get.

He learns no learning, but reviews what others have passed through.

Thus he lets all things develop in their own natural way, and does not venture to act.

Regard the small as the great; regard the few as many.

Manage the difficult while they are easy;

Manage the great while they are small.

All difficult things in the world start from the easy.

All the great things in the world start from the small.

The tree that fills a man's arms arises from a tender shoot.

The nine-storied tower is raised from a heap of earth;

A thousand miles' journey begins from the spot under one's feet.

Therefore the Sage never attempts great things, and thus he can achieve what is great.

He who makes easy promises will seldom keep his word;

He who regards many things as easy will find many difficulties.

Therefore the Sage regards things as difficult, and consequently never has difficulties.

Origins in Reversal

Treat lacking deem-action as 'deem-acting'.

Treat having no social affair as 'social affair'.

Treat the absence of flavor as 'flavor'.

'Great' the small; 'many' the few;

Use virtuosity in dealing with moral anger.

Plan the difficult in its easy phases.

Deem-act on the great in its small phases.

The difficult affairs of the social world start with something easy.

The great affairs of the social world start with something small.

Using this: Sages, to the end, do not deem-act on it as 'great' and so are able
to accomplish its greatness.

In general, light assent necessarily diminishes trust.

Much ease then necessarily much difficulty.

Using this: Sages make it even more difficult.

So in the end they have no difficulty.

Action or non-action, work or non-work, knowledge or non-knowledge,

Large or small, more or less:

It is just like returning hatred with love,

Contemplating the difficult with the easy,

Working on the great through the small.

Because the hard tasks in the world must be preceded by what is easy,

Great affairs in the world must begin with what is minute.

Hence, the wise never works on what is great;

He achieves what is great.

The easier it is to promise a thing,

The less one can fulfill.

The more lightly things are taken,

The more difficulties occur.

Therefore, the wise takes things as difficult;

He is always free from the difficult.

Do that which takes no action.

Deal with that which engenders no effort.

Taste that which has no flavour.

Treat the small as the great.

Return enmity with virtue.

Plan the difficult as the easy.

Carry out the hard work as if it were the finer details.

The difficult things under Heaven come from the easy things.

Great matter is made up of minor matter.

Therefore the sage does not try to be great, and thus he can be great.

He who makes easy promises can be little trusted.

He who considers things to be easy will meet many difficulties.

That is why the sage expects difficulties, and therefore encounters none.

Act without action;

Disturb without disturbance;

Taste the tasteless.

Great, small, much, little,

Requite enmity with favor.

Tackle a difficult issue while it is easy;

Create a great enterprise while it is small.

All difficult issues under heaven

Begin from easy ones;

All great enterprises under heaven

Begin from small ones.

Hence, the sage man never presumed vastness,

So, he could achieve vastness.

For he who makes promises lightly

Must lack in trustworthiness;

He who takes many things easy

Must encounter many difficulties.

Hence, even the sage man

Considered the task difficult,

Therefore, eventually he had no difficulty.

The Tao is the source of everything,

The treasure of the good man,

The sustainer of the bad man.

Therefore,

Even the ceremonial splendor of the coronation of the emperor and his three ministers,

And the value of the jewels and the knights' horses,

Are nothing compared to the splendor of this Tao.

Why did the ancients value the Tao?

Is it because it is possible to seek it and find it and liberate sinners with it?

For this reason, the Tao is the most valuable thing in the world.

Good words will nurture our honor,

Good deeds will give a person a good name.

Do that which consists in taking no action;

Pursue that which is not meddlesome;

Savor that which has no flavor.

Make
the small big and the few many;

Do good to him who has done you an injury.

Lay
plans for the accomplishment of the difficult before it becomes difficult;

Make something big by starting with it when small.

Difficult
things in the word must needs have their beginnings in the easy;

Big things must needs have their beginnings in the small.

Therefore
it is because the sage never attempts to be great that he succeeds in becoming
great.

One
who makes promises rashly rarely keeps good faith;

One who is in the habit of considering things easy meets with frequent difficulties.

Therefore
even the sage treats some things as difficult.

That is why in the end no difficulties can get the better of him.

Consider Beginnings

Assert non-assertion.

Practise non-practice.

Taste the tasteless.

Make great the small.

Make much the little.

Requite hatred with virtue.

Contemplate a difficulty when it is easy. Manage a great thing when it is small.

The world's most difficult undertakings necessarily originate while easy, and the world's greatest undertakings necessarily originate while small.

Therefore the holy man to the end does not venture to play the great, and thus he can accomplish his greatness.

Rash promises surely lack faith, and many easy things surely involve in many difficulties.

Therefore, the holy man regards everything as difficult, and thus to the end encounters no difficulties.

Act without expecting results. Let the Tao do your work. Taste without tasting. Look at the big as small; think of the many as few. Have compassion for petty tyrants. Deal with things when they arise. Complete great works by gradually fulfilling them. To become a master of the Tao, take one step at a time. When your foothold is firm, the next step will come naturally. The master never aspires to greatness, but is immersed in every step. This is his greatness. Promises can be broken. What is easy can become difficult. The master realises he must ground his step before he can take another. For this reason, he never falls.

Govern with laissez-faire.

Act without fanfare.

Dine with the commonest fare.

Big begins as small; many accrue from few.

In tackling difficult tasks, first tackle those easy;

In tackling big tasks, first tackle those flimsy.

The difficult tasks of the world begin as easy;

The big tasks of the world begin as flimsy.

Thus, the sage, who never considers self big, completes many big tasks.

Thus,

promise easily made leads to promise not fulfilled;

difficulty underestimated leads to difficulty multiplied.

Thus, the sage, in treating every task as difficult, encounters no difficulties.

If you're nothing doing what you do,

you act without acting and savor without savoring,

you render the small vast and the few many,

use Integrity to repay hatred,

see the complexity in simplicity,

find the vast in the minute.

The complex affairs of all beneath heaven are there in simplicity,

and the vast affairs of all beneath heaven are there in the minute.

That's why a sage never bothers with vastness and so becomes utterly vast.

Easy promises breed little trust, and too much simplicity breeds too much complexity.

That's why a sage inhabits the complexity of things and so avoids all complexity.

Take no willful action,

Diffuse contentious even to nonevent,

Transform the tasteless tasteful.

Big or small, numerous or few,

Repay enmities with virtue.

Anticipate difficulties while it is still easy,

Prepare for being big while it is still small.

Difficult problems in the world must have grown from what used to be easy,

Great events in the world must have started from what used to be small.\

So the sage does not aim to be great,

Thus he can achieve greatness.

Light promises often result in loss of credibility,

Easy encounters often are followed by difficulties.

So even the sage anticipates difficulty,

Thus he encounters no difficulty.

Acting
absent of acting

Effort absent of effort

Tasting absent of tasting

Great, small, abundant, few

Repay hatred, ideal happens.

Planning
the difficult relates to what is easy

Acting great relates to what is small

The difficult efforts of the world seed doing related to what is easy

The great efforts of the world seed doing related to what
is small.

Appropriately
it happens

That sages eventually lack great action

So they are able to perfect what is great.

In
the end light promises seed scanty belief

Abundant easiness seeds abundant difficulty.

Appropriately
it happens

That sages see all things as being equally difficult

So eventually an absence of difficulty is with them.

To act without acting; to be busy without being busy; to taste without tasting;

to look equally on the great, the small, the many and the few; to be indifferent to thanks and reproaches; this is how the Sage acts.

He only sets about difficult complications through their easiest details, and only applies himself to great problems in their weak beginnings.

The Sage never undertakes anything great, and that is why he makes great things.

He who promises much, cannot keep his word; he who embarrasses himself with too many things, even easy things, never succeeds in anything.

The Sage keeps clear of difficulty, therefore he never has any difficulties.

Act without action

Manage without meddling

Taste without tasting

Great, small, many, few

Respond to hatred with virtue

Plan difficult tasks through the simplest tasks

Achieve large tasks through the smallest tasks

The difficult tasks of the world

Must be handled through the simple tasks

The large tasks of the world

Must be handled through the small tasks

Therefore, sages never attempt great deeds all through life

Thus they can achieve greatness

One who makes promises lightly must deserve little trust

One who sees many easy tasks must encounter much difficulty

Therefore, sages regard things as difficult

So they never encounter difficulties all through life

The sages take proactive actions without any attachments or expectations of specific outcomes. They manage processes and affairs around them without trying to manipulate them. They get a sense (a taste) of the situation without becoming so involved and engrossed that they lose their objectivity, and thus impair their judgment and ability to act.

Whether tasks are great, small, many or few, the sages approach them the same way. They also treat everyone with the same degree of gentle kindness, so that even if someone attacks them out of anger or hatred, they would not fight fire with fire. Instead, they would respond with compassion, against which there is no defense.

The sages are masters at achieving large and difficult tasks. They make it look so easy. How do they do it? What is their secret?

The sages break tasks down to their constituent parts. If a task is difficult, they start with its easiest part. If a task is large, they start with its smallest component. These small and simple tasks require little time and effort, and when they are complete, the success inherent in their completion generates positive energy. Sages would then use this energy and leverage the success to catapult them toward the next smallest or easiest task. Each greater success generates greater energy, greater feeling of satisfaction, and greater ability to handle the next challenge.

This is how sages achieve great and difficult tasks with seeming ease. Their secret is simply that they never tackle such tasks head-on. To do so would be foolhardy and counterproductive.

Someone who makes promises quickly is, in all likelihood, someone who breaks the same promises regularly. Therefore, sages would be very reluctant to make overly optimistic projections in regards to a task at hand. Someone who thinks everything is easy is naive and inexperienced. Therefore sages regard all tasks as either challenging or potentially challenging. Their attitude in approach a task is always cautious and conservative. Whereas many people promise too much and deliver too little, sages promise little but deliver beyond expectations.

A CONSIDERATION OF BEGINNINGS

One should avoid assertion (wu wei) and practice inaction. One should learn to find taste in the tasteless, to enlarge the small things, and multiply the few. He should respond to hatred with kindness. He should resolve a difficulty while it is easy, and manage a great thing while it is small. Surely all the world's difficulties arose from slight causes, and all the world's great affairs had small beginnings.

Therefore the wise man avoids to the end participation in great affairs and by so doing establishes his greatness.

Rash promises are lacking in faith and many things that appear easy are full of difficulties. Therefore the wise man considers every thing difficult and so to the end he has no difficulties.

Do (wei) when there is nothing to do (wu-wei),

Manage affairs (shih) when there are none to manage,

Know (chih) by not knowing.

Regard the great as small, the much as little.

Repay injury (yüan) with te.

Plan the difficult while it is easy.

Accomplish (wei) the great when it is small.

Difficult affairs of the world,

Must be done while they are easy.

Great affairs of the world,

Must be done while they are small.

The sage never does anything great,

Therefore he can accomplish the great.

He who makes promises lightly seldom keeps his words.

He who takes much to be easy finds much to be difficult.

Therefore even the sage takes things to be difficult,

So that in the end they are not difficult.

Achieve serenity. Work passively. Taste the flavorless. Large or small, many or few, exchange love for hatred.

Undertake the difficult while it is still simple; undertake the great while it is still minor. The problems in the world must be solved while they are easy; the great while they are minor. The truly wise find greatness by undertaking nothing great.

A promise lightly made is often difficult to keep. Whoever makes light of things encounters many problems. The truly wise know that things are difficult and therefore meet with no difficulties.

Act without ado; work without effort.

Taste the tasteless; treat the small as large and the few as many.

Reward evil with goodness.

Take on the difficult while it is still easy, the large while it is still small.

Difficult always begins as easy; large always begins as small.

Therefore, the Tao–Master never tries to be great.

As a result, he accomplishes great things.

Big promises produce little trust.

Treating something as quite easy makes it very difficult.

The Tao–Master regards everything as difficult,

which means that, for him, everything is easy.

Sixty-three

Practice non-action.

Work without doing.

Taste the tasteless.

Magnify the small, increase the few.

Reward bitterness with care.

See simplicity in the complicated.

Achieve greatness in little things.

In
the universe the difficult things are done as if they are easy.

In the universe great acts are made up of small deeds.

The sage does not attempt anything very big,

And thus achieved greatness.

Easy
promises make for little trust.

Taking things lightly results in great difficulty.

Because the sage always confronts difficulties,

He never experiences them.

Act by means of inaction;

Deal with matters by means of not being meddlesome;

Taste by means of tastelessness.

The big stems from the small;

The many is based on the few.

To overcome the difficult should begin with the easy;

To accomplish what is big should begin with the small.

The difficult things in the world must originate in the easy;

The big things in the world must take root in the small.

That is why the sage can accomplish what is great by never attempting to be great.

Light promise-giving, light promise-breaking;

The easier one considers things, the more difficult things become.

That is why the sage never meets with difficulty

Because he always considers things difficult.

Act through no-action,

Attend to no-affair,

Relish no-flavor,

Take the small as big and the few as many.

Repay hatred with Te.

Plan difficult things while they are easy.

Handle big things while they are small.

Difficult things under Heaven

Always arise from what is easy;

Big things under Heaven

Always arise from what is small.

For this reason the sage

Never intends big things,

And thus can accomplish big things.

He who agrees lightly invariably inspires little faith.

He who considers many things easy invariably encounters many difficulties.

For this reason even the sage considers things difficult;

Therefore he never encounters difficulties.

Normal people act rashly, but the sage does not.

Normal people interfere freely, but the sage is different.

Normal people prefer tasty cuisine, but the sage prefers plain food.

The sage will deal with all matters, big or small, by always recompensing ill will with goodwill.

To solve a complex issue, you must first start working with the easy problems.

To accomplish a huge task, you must start and graduate from a series of simpler tasks.

To solve the most complex problem, you must tackle the simplest one first.

The greatest task in the world is often the aggregation of smaller tasks.

The sage has never endeavoured to accomplish a great task.

Yet, he accomplishes a great task.

A person who readily gives promises often fails to keep them.

A person who takes things too lightly will definitely be plagued with many problems.

The sage regards everything as potentially troublesome.

Consequently, he will never encounter any difficulty.

Origin of Favors

En Shih

Practice non-interference.

Assert non-assertion.

Taste the tasteless.

Regard small as great, little as much.

Requite evil with virtue.

Tackle difficult tasks while they are easy;

Perform great tasks while they are small.

Difficult tasks must be begun when yet easy;

Great tasks must be begun when yet small.

That's why the Sage, to the end of his days,

Does not have to tackle great tasks,

And for this very reason achieves greatness.

Promises lightly made show little good faith;

Duties neglected are bound to become difficult.

That's why the Sage assumes things to be difficult,

And never in life incurs any difficulty.

He who acts by non-actiuon,

Who does, but does not undertake,

Who finds savour in the tasteless -

Will see the great in the litle, the many in the few.

"He will repay injuries with kindness;

He will deal with hard things while they are still easy,

And tackle great things while they are still small."

All difficulties on earth and easy in their beginnings;

All great things start by being small.

Therefore the Sage:

Because he does not turn his attention to the great,

Achieves greatness.

Ready promises inspire little confidence;

He who takes things too lightly encounters many difficulties.

Therefore the Sage:

Because he recognizes what is difficult,

Never has any difficulties.

Do nothing-doing;

Manage nothing-managing;

Taste nothing-tasting.

Exalt the low;

Multiply the few;

Requite hatred with virtue.

Tackle the difficult when it is easy.

Handle the big when it is small.

Difficult things beneath heaven

Are made up of easy things.

Big things beneath heaven

Are made up of small things.

Thus the sage

Never deals with the great,

But accomplishes greatness.

Light promises indeed lack trust,

Much easiness leads to much difficulty.

Thus the sage

Holds everything difficult,

But meets no difficulty in the end.

Do that which is not done by doing.

Make that which is not made by making.

Taste that which cannot be distinguished by taste.

Hold the same regard for the few and the many.

Requite the unkind with kindness.

Thus, one of subtle virtue desires what is not connected with desire,

sets no value on the rare goods of the world,

learns what is not learned through learning,

and induces people to return to that which they have overlooked.

LXIII.

Think
in the Beginning

Act
the non-acting, let dealing go on without dealings,

In
the tasteless find taste, let the great in the little be known,

Find
in the few that therein are embodied the many,

And
recompense hatred with deeds of goodness alone.

Consider
what may become difficult, while it is easy,

Manage
the great, by taking it while it is small,

From
the easy arise all the difficult things under heaven,

And
affairs that are great their source in the little recall.

So
the sage, not acting the great, the great will accomplish,

Who
promises lightly lacks truth, and they who believe

Many
things to be easy will find many hard, while the sage

With
the difficult, even, finds nothing too hard to achieve.

Be active, with the Activity of Inner Life.

Serve, with the Service of Inner Life.

Be fragrant, with the Fragrance of Inner Life.

The great shall be small,

The many shall be few, and

Evil shall be recompensed by goodness.

Mediate on difficult things till they become easy.

Do great deeds till they appear to be small.

To serve men in difficult things,

We must begin by easy things.

To serve men in great things,

We must begin by doing small things.

That is why the self-controlled man to the end of life does not become great, and thus he can perfect his greatness.

The Master has little faith in a quickly mad promise.

Many things are easy, many are also difficult.

The self-controlled man takes hold of difficulties.

To the end of life he solves difficulties in the Inner Life.

Do the Effortlessness.

Try for the effortless.

Enjoy the joyless.

Raise high the low.

Multiply the few.

Return hurt with kindness.

Stop troubles in the beginning.

Plant the great with the small.

Difficult things of the world.

Can only be tackled when they are easy.

Big things of the world

Can only be completed by paying attention to their small beginnings.

The Complete Thinker never has to struggle with the big things,

But they alone are capable of completing them!

They who promises lightly must be lacking in faith.

They who thinks everything easy

will end by finding difficulty.

The Complete Thinker,

who regards everything as difficult,

Meets with no difficulties in the end.

Do by not doing, act by nonacting, taste the taste-less, regard the small as great, much as little.

Plan what is difficult where it is easy; do what is great where it is minute.

The hardest things in the world begin with what is easy; the greatest things in the world begin with what is minute.

Therefore the Saint never does anything great and so is able to achieve the great.

Now, he who promises lightly, will have but little faith. He who finds much easy, will find much hard.

Therefore the Saint, while finding even (the easy) hard, will in the end have nothing that is hard.

(It is the way of the Tao) to act without (thinking of) acting;

to conduct affairs without (feeling the) trouble of them; to taste

without discerning any flavour; to consider what is small as great,

and a few as many; and to recompense injury with kindness.

(The
master of it) anticipates things that are difficult while they

are easy, and does things that would become great while they are

small. All difficult things in the world are sure to arise from a

previous state in which they were easy, and all great things from one

in which they were small. Therefore the sage, while he never does

what is great, is able on that account to accomplish the greatest

things.

He
who lightly promises is sure to keep but little faith; he who is

continually thinking things easy is sure to find them difficult.

Therefore the sage sees difficulty even in what seems easy, and so

never has any difficulties.

Act by Doing Nothing Much Personal;
handle affairs through noninterference.

Taste what has no flavor;
regard the small as great, the few as many.

Repay resentment with DEI-ty's virtues.
Undertake
difficult tasks
by appreciating what is easy about them.
Do great deeds

by focusing on their little details.
All
difficulties under heaven arise from what is simple;
all great things under
heaven depend upon little details.
Thus,
Sages never strive to do what is great;
therefore they can achieve greatness.

One
who lightly agrees
is seldom believed;
One who thinks everything is
going to be easy
encounters many problems!
Consequently,
even Sages consider things difficult;
and thus, find them easier than they
thought, in the end.

Begin
with the easy

And do without doing

There isn't a thing

That you should be pursuing

Begin
with the simple

There's no need attacking

Your greatness will lie

In all that you're lacking

Tackle
problems when they're small

And still subject to solution

The largest problem is resolved

By simple deeds of diminution

Can
you center every day

And see all the seers see

Empty here and brimming there

A marvelous asymmetry?

DO the Non-Ado.

Strive for the effortless.

Savour the savourless.

Exalt the low.

Multiply the few.

Requite injury with kindness.

Nip troubles in the bud.

Sow the great in the small.

Difficult things of the world

Can only be tackled when they are easy.

Big things of the world

Can only be achieved by attending to their small beginnings.

Thus, the Sage never has to grapple with big things,

Yet he alone is capable of achieving them!

He who promises lightly must be lacking in faith.

He who thinks everything easy will end by finding everything difficult.

Therefore, the Sage, who regards everything as difficult,

Meets with no difficulties in the end.

The Tao can accomplish much without interfering,

it can achieve without forcing,

it can taste the tasteless.

Large or small, many or few,

repay hatred and injury with virtue and compassion.

Accomplish the hard task while it is still easy.

Handle large affairs while they are still small.

For even the most difficult and large of tasks and affairs have a point where they are still easy and small.

Thus it is that the Master never does anything hard or large,

yet he is able to accomplish a great many things.

A rashly made promise oftentimes is not carried through.

And those who think all will be easy do not prepare, and find the way difficult.

So the sage regards all things as being difficult, he prepares,

thus it is that he experiences less difficulty with them.

Act by not acting;

do by not doing.

Enjoy the plain and simple.

Find that greatness in the small.

Take care of difficult problems

while they are still easy;

Do easy things before they become too hard.

Difficult
problems are best solved while they are easy.

Great projects are best started while they are small.

The Master never takes on more than she can handle,

which means that she leaves nothing undone.

When
an affirmation is given too lightly,

keep your eyes open for trouble ahead.

When something seems too easy,

difficulty is hiding in the details.

The master expects great difficulty,

so the task is always easier than planned.

The wise leader knows how to act effectively.

To act effectively, be aware and unbiased. If you are aware, you will know what is happening; you will not act rashly. If you are unbiased, you can react in a balanced and centered manner.

Have respect for every person and every issue directed at you. Do not dismiss any encounter as insignificant. But neither should you become anxious or afraid of being overwhelmed or embarrassed.

If you are attacked or criticized, react in a way that will shed light on the event. This is a matter of being centered and of knowing that an encounter is a dance and not a threat to your ego or existence. Tell the truth.

If you are conscious of what is happening in a group, you will recognize emerging situations long before they have gotten out of hand. Every situation, no matter how vast or complex it may become, begins both small and simple.

Neither avoid nor seek encounters, but be open and when an encounter arises, respond to it while it is still manageable. There is no virtue in delaying until heroic action is needed to set things right. In this way, potentially difficult situations become simple.

If you have not bragged about your abilities or tried to make people be the way you think they ought to be, very few group members will want to encounter you anyway.

Do without "doing".

Work without forcing.

Taste without seasonings.

Recognize the Great in the small,

And the many in the few.

Repay hatred with kindness.

Dea with the difficult while it is stil easy.

Begin great works while they are small.

Certainly the Earth does difficult work with ease,

And accomplishes great affairs from smal beginnings.

So, the Sage, by not striving for greatness,

Achieves greatness.

A person who makes promises lightly

Is not regarded as trustworthy.

lIf you think everything is easy,

You will find only difficulty.

That is why the Sage considers All things difficult

And finds nothing too difficult in the end.

Practice
flowing in peace and harmony.

Work without laboring.

Savor the tasteless.

Enlarge the small.

Multiply the few.

Mitigate bitterness with kindness.

Accomplish
difficult endeavors by a series

of easy tasks.

Accomplish great deeds by persisting

in mundane acts.

When
one flows in peace and harmony and

perceives the oneness in all things:

difficulties are easily overcome and

great accomplishments are

seen as a compilation of a lifetime

of insignificant days.

The
sage never tries to achieve greatness.

She flows in peace and harmony and

at the end of her days comprehends her

legacy.

Cursory
promises are generally unreliable.

Neglecting basics fosters difficulties.

The sage considers the potential difficulty in all

things

and circumvents them by flowing in peace and

harmony.

Govern without doing. Achieve without acting. Appreciate without

indulging.

Great or small, many or few,

repay Injustice with Virtue.

Plan for difficulty while it is easy.

Handle the big things while they are still small.

Under Heaven, difficult affairs always begin as easy ones.

Under Heaven, great events always arise from small ones.

Thus does the wise man, in the end, do nothing great,

because he already is able to achieve great results.

Remember that quick agreement deserves little trust,

for 'very easy' always turns into 'very difficult'.

Thus does the wise man treat things as difficult,

so that in the end, nothing is difficult.

Act by not acting.

Work without effort.

Savour the tasteless.

See much in the few and greatness in the small.

Reward injury with kindness.

Plan the difficult while it is still easy.

Accomplish greatness in small things.

Under Heaven, difficult things consist of easy things.

Under Heaven, great actions consist of small deeds.

The Sage never attempts anything great,

And thus accomplishes greatness.

He who takes his promises lightly will not be trusted.

He who thinks everything is easy will meet many difficulties.

This is why the Sage regards everything as difficult,

And therefore never meets with any difficulties.

One does things so that one needs to do nothing.

One takes actions so that one needs no action.

One tastes so that one can appreciate tastelessness.

One values what is small or little, and returns good for evil.

One starts from the easiest to achieve the most difficult.

One starts from the most trivial to achieve the highest.

For it is only by taking easy measures

That one can achieve the most difficult in the world.

It is only by taking trivial steps

That one can achieve the highest in the world.

Therefore, the wise person who never looks important

Is able to be the most important.

Those who make hasty promises can rarely keep them.

Those who think nothing difficult will have many difficulties.

That is why the wise person worries about difficulties

And can therefore solve them successfully.

Be a Non Doer work at Not Working acquire a taste for that which has no taste.

Treat small things as though they were great treat few things as though they were many. "Reward what is injurious, with kind Te."

Plan difficult things focussing on the easy parts do great things focussing on the small details.

Difficult tasks in the world always begin from what is easy great tasks in the world always begin from what is small.

And so the Wise Person: Does not 'do great things' and so is able to fulfill his greatness.

Yes: Light agreement is never very trustworthy considering everything easy makes everything difficult.

And so the Wise Person: Treats things as difficult, and in the end has no difficulty.

Rid yourself of the vanity of mind and unnecessary deeds, keep calm, and be satisfied with simple food!

Thus one begins walking the Path toward cognition of the Great Tao, Which is One Whole consisting of many Great Souls.

Also there are many small souls incarnated into bodies.

Having cognized this, the wise knows that one should requite hatred with good.

Start difficult work with easy beginning. Every great work consists of small components. In this way — gradually — one fulfills great tasks.

If someone promises to perform great work quickly, such a person cannot be trusted...

But the wise never starts "great undertakings" in the world of matter! Therefore, he can perform great work in the spiritual world. It is not hard for him.

Good deeds are not done in a hurry,

Efficient work does not need great effort.

By
small steps, what is little will grow,

And what is behind will eventually come in front.

Great
expeditions start with a small step,

Great achievements have little beginnings,

The Wise Person is able to envisage future results,

In small steps, and humble beginnings.

Thus
the Wise One following the Tao Way,

Starting with moderation, anything is achieved.

His works are thus solid and time lasting,

Because all it is done patiently and without struggle.

Act
by nonaction. Do by not doing. Find flavor in blandness. Magnify the small.
Augment the few. Respond to enmity with virtue. Solve difficult problems while
they are still easy. Do great tasks while they are yet small. The difficult
problems of the world must be solved while they are still easy. The great tasks
of the world must be done while they are still small. For this reason the Sage
never undertakes great projects, and so he can accomplish great things. When
acquiescence is given lightly, trust must be diminished. When things are oversimplified,
difficulty must be magnified. So the Sage treats things as even more difficult
[than they would seem to be], and [so] in the end there is no difficulty.

Acting by inaction;

Doing by not doing;

Tasting by not tasting.

Whether it is great or small, whether it is much or little,

Always repaying malice with virtue.

Planning difficulties from the easier.

Employing the great from the small.

The world's difficult things surely begin with the easy.

The world's great things surely begin with the small.

Therefore, the Sage never does anything to be great

And so accomplishes greatness.

To take one's promises lightly results in little confidence.

To take things too easily results in much difficulty.

Therefore, even the Sage takes things seriously.

And never has any difficulty.

The Path of Least Resistance

Act without action; work without effort.

Taste without savoring.

Magnify the small; increase the few.

Repay ill-will with kindness.

Plan the difficult when it is easy;

Handle the big where it is small.

The world's hardest work begins when it is easy;

The world's largest effort begins where it is small.

Evolved Individuals, finally, take no great action,

And in that way the great is achieved.

Those who commit easily, inspire little trust,

How easy to inspire hardness!

Therefore Evolved Individuals view all as difficult.

Finally they have no difficulty!

Do not strive for fame and fortune and have it all. When facing an obstacle, walk around it.

Act in repose;

Be at rest when you work;

Relish unflavored things.

Great or small,

Frequent or rare,

Requite anger with virtue.

Take
hard jobs in hand

While they are easy;

And great affairs too

While they are small.

The troubles of the world

Cannot be solved except

Before they grow too hard.

The business of the world

Cannot be done except

While relatively small.

The Wise Man, then, throughout his life

Does nothing great and yet achieves

A greatness of his own.

Again,
a promise lightly made

Inspires little confidence;

Or often trivial, sure that man

Will often come to grief.

Choosing hardship, then, the Wise Man

Never meets with hardship all his life.

Consider nonaction as and action, having no trouble as an affair and flavourless as a flavour.

No matter how hostile others are toward me,

I always repay them with "De."

Prepare for a difficult problem while it is easy,

Enter on a great task while it is still small.

All the difficult things under Heaven necessarily arise from the state in which they were easy;

All the great tasks under Heaven arise from the state in which they were small.

For this reason, the sage never does great things,

And he can accomplish great things just on that account.

Light promising makes on lose one's credit,

And thinking things easy leads to difficulties.

So, the sage, though he is very wise, pays much attention to the difficulties,

Therefore he is free from difficulties in the end.

Act by not acting;

do by not doing;

find flavor in that which has no flavor.

Deal with the small as if it were the great, and deal with the few as if it were the many, but respond to resentment in terms of virtue.

Plan for the difficult while it is still easy;

work on the great while it is still small.

Every difficult matter under Heaven surely originates in something easy, and every great matter under Heaven surely originates in something small.

Therefore it is because the sage never tries to be great that he fulfills his greatness.

Assent lightly given surely inspires little trust.

Regarding many things as easy is sure to result in many difficulties.

Therefore the sage still regards them as difficulties.

Thus he never has difficulties.

1. Act without acting;

2. Serve without concern for affairs;

3. Find flavor in what has no flavor.

4.
Regard the small as large and the few as many,

5. And repay resentment with kindness.

6. Plan for the difficult while it is easy;

7. Act on the large while it's minute.

8. The most difficult things in the world begin as things that are easy;

9. The largest things in the world arise from the minute.

10. Therefore the Sage, to the end does not strive to do the great,

11. And as a result, he is able to accomplish the great;

12. Those who too lightly agree will necessarily be trusted by few;

13. And those who regard many things as easy will necessarily [end up] with
many difficulties.

14. Therefore, even the Sage regards things as difficult,

15. And as a result, in the end he has no difficulty.

Keep still.

Don't work so hard.

Learn to appreciate everyday life.

Pay attention to details.

Start small and work your way up.

When people give you trouble,

let it slide.

Break everything
down to its essentials.

Get the job done

before it becomes a chore.

With the right
preparation,

difficult tasks

can be completed with ease;

every major project

consists of simple steps.

The Masters
don't take on

more than they can handle,

which is why

they can do just about anything.

Don't promise

more than you can deliver,

and don't underestimate the task:

You'll only make things harder for yourself.

The Masters
are always aware

of the difficulties involved,

which is why

they never have to deal with them.

.

The Wise Never Strive

Act without interfering.

Work without doing.

Taste the tasteless.

Large or small, many or few, repay injury with goodness.

Handle the difficult while it is still easy.

Handle the big while it is still small.

Difficult tasks begin with what is easy.

Great accomplishments begin with what is small.

Therefore the wise never strive for the great

and thus achieve greatness.

Rash promises inspire little trust.

Taking things too lightly results in much difficulty.

Thus the wise always confront difficulties

and therefore have no difficulty.

Let your action be non-action your doing letting go your enjoying being free from gain.

See the great as small the many as one and requite hatred with goodness.

Tackle the difficult while it is easy.

Master the big while it is small.

For everything difficult arises from what is easy everything big grows from what is smallest.

Thus, mastering the small the Sage accomplishes the great without acting big.

Since the Sage unbiased sees the end in the beginning the small in the big what is riskiest and hardest becomes easy for him.

Difficult And Easy

Lao Tze says,

He who practices acting without intent to control fate will find that there is no business which is troubling him to manage.

He who can taste a tasteless thing will learn to regard what is small as great, and a few as many;

and to recompense injury with kindness.

He will deal with things that are difficult while they are easy,

and handle things that would become great while they are still small.

All difficult things in the world arise from an original state of having been easy,

and all great things arise from an original state of having been small.

Therefore the sage never attempts to achieve a great feat.

He who makes promises lightly rarely keeps good faith.

He who likes to think things will be easy will find them difficult.

Therefore the sage sees difficulty even in what seems easy, so they are always free of difficulties.

BEGINNING AND COMPLETING

Act
without contriving;

work naturally, and taste the tasteless;

magnify the small; increase the few,

and reward bitterness with care.

Seek the simple in the complex,

and achieve greatness in small things.

It
is the way of nature

that even difficult things are done with ease,

and great acts made up of smaller deeds.

The sage achieves greatness by small deeds multiplied.

Promises
easily made are most easily broken,

and acting with insufficient care

causes subsequent trouble.

The sage confronts problems as they arise,

so that they do not trouble him.

Act without doing;

work without effort.

Think of the small as large

and the few as many.

Confront the difficult

while it is still easy;

accomplish the great task

by a series of small acts.

The Master never reaches for the great;

thus she achieves greatness.

When she runs into a difficulty,

she stops and gives herself to it.

She doesn't cling to her own comfort;

thus problems are no problem for her.

Do not interfere;

prepare the unprepared;

and think the unthinkable.

No matter whether it is great or small, whether it is much or little, hatred must be met with love.

Therefore, resolve the difficulty when it is easy.

Change the graveness when it is insignificant.

A difficult world affair must be solved when it is still easy.

A grave world situation must be changed when it is insignificant.

However, the Sage ruler never wishes himself to be superior, therefore he eventually becomes superior.

Hence an easy promise must result in promise-breaking.

Frequent easy-goings meet more difficulties.

A Sage was always aware of difficulties, thus he met no difficulty at last.

Do nondoing.

Engage in non-affairs.

Savor non-flavor.

Large or small, many or few, reward or punishment, are all being done through Action.

Seek what is difficult with ease.

Effect what is great while it is small.

The most difficult things in the world are done while they are easy.

The greatest things in the world are done while they are small.

The sage never plans to do a great thing.

Thus, he accomplishes what is great.

Facile promises necessarily result in little trust.

What is easy necessarily entails difficulty.

Thus the sage, through extreme trials, encounters no difficulty.

LXIII

Do
without doing, without expectations

Taste what has no flavor

[In
Progress]

Do Nondoing

Do nondoing,

strive for nonstriving,

savor the flavorless,

regard the small as important,

make much of little,

repay enmity with virtue;

plan for difficulty when it is still easy,

do the great while it is still small.

The most difficult things in the world

must be done while they are easy;

the greatest things in the world

must be done while they are small.

Because of this sages never do great things;

that is why they can fulfill their greatness.

If you agree too easily, you'll be little trusted;

if you take it easy a lot, you'll have a lot of problems.

Therefore it is through difficulty

that sages end up without problems.

Practice no forcing; undertake natural tasks; eat plain food.

No matter big or small, more or less, reply hostility with kindness.

When handling difficulties, one should start with the easiest first.

When eating the elephant, take one bite at a time.

In the world, difficult tasks are composed of easy ones;

Big tasks are formed by small ones.

This is why the sage never attempt big, but can achieve big.

Easily promising results in less credibility.

Broadly underestimating leads to a lot of difficulties.

This is why sages treat everything as if it was difficult.

So they never have difficulties.

Do non-doing.

Carry out no-work.

Taste the tasteless.

Make the small big.

Make the little much.

Render Virtue to enmity.

Plan the difficult when it is still easy.

Accomplish the great when it is still small.

Difficult things in the world can be achieved in what is easy.

Big things in the world can be achieved in what is minute.

Thus, the sage never does big things, yet by that he is capable of achieving them!

He who promises lightly must rarely fulfill it.

He who thinks a thing easy will find it difficult.

Therefore, the sage, who regards everything as difficult, meets with no difficulties in the end.

Doing, then Wu-Wei.

Working, then nothing left undone.

Tasting, then no flavor could be bizarre.

Reward denouncement with kindness.

Doing big project with small steps.

Achieving greatness in little things.

The difficult things in the world must be done with easy steps.

The great acts of the world are made up of small deeds.

The sage doe not attempt anything very big, yet achieve greatness.

Who swears often, must be untrustworthy.

View every task as a easy job, will encounter many difficulties.

Thus, the sages view every task as a difficult job,

yet nothing is difficult for them.

Act without striving.

Work without interfering.

Find the flavor in what is flavorless.

Enlarge
the small, increase the few.

Heal injury with goodness.

Handle
the difficult while it is still easy.

Cultivate the great while it is still small.

All
difficult things begin as easy things.

All great things begin as small things.

Therefore,
the True Person never attempts anything great,

and accomplishes great things.

Lightly
made promises inspire little faith.

Trying to make things easy results in great difficulties.

Therefore,
the True Person regards everything as difficult,

and is never overcome by difficulties.

You
--

do without working

work without doing

find flavor in water

make the small big

the few into many

turn the other cheek

reward bad actions with good

mold the hard while it is still soft

create the great while it is still small.

Wise person --

deal with the microcosm,

never the macrocosm,

the individual not the group,

and thus succeed.

Little commitment creates little faith

and many easy little things create one big difficult thing.

The
wise person knows how to make

the simple

complicated,

and by knowing this

avoids complications.

Succeed in the magician's wu-wei: Accomplish seemingly do-nothing.

Attend seemingly to no-affairs. And do completely without ado. What runs, acts
without action, does without doing,

So
let's taste without tasting. Taste the flavourless. Taste the flavourless without
tasting. Find flavourless flavour.

Whether
it's big or small, many or few, requite hatred with virtue.

Dao can make the small great and the few many, can requite injuries with some
decent deeds. But prepare for the hard while it's still easy. Deal with it while
it's still easy. Deal with the great or big while it's still small.

In governing your kingdom everything hard must be dealt with while it's still
easy. The hard has to be dealt with while still very easy. All the great (ones
and great problems) of the world are to be dealt with while they're yet small.
Everything great must be dealt with while it's still small.

Therefore
the wise man never has to deal with the great; and so gets greatness. He never
strives for the great, by this the great is had.

So great undertakings shall start with what's small.

But
again "Who makes rash promises surely lacks. Who lightly makes a promise, can
find it too hard to keep his faith. And light assent inspires little confidence.
Who takes things very easily is surely in for dealing with more difficulty in
the end. So "many easies" means many a hard. In other words, who makes light
of many things should find many difficulties.

From
all this even the wise man regards things as hard, but he also knows how to
make the easy difficult. For that reason he very seldom meets with difficulties.
[Uha.]

Act through nonaction,

Handle affairs through noninterference,

Taste what has no taste,

Regard the small as great, the few as many,

Repay resentment with integrity.

Undertake difficult tasks by approaching what is easy in them;

Do great deeds by focusing on their minute aspects.

All difficulties under heaven arise from what is easy,

All great things under heaven arise from what is minute.

For this reason,

The sage never strives to do what is great.

Therefore,

He can achieve greatness.

One who lightly assents will seldom be believed;

One who thinks everything is easy will encounter much difficulty.

For this reason,

Even the sage considers things difficult.

Therefore,

In the end he is without difficulty.

Acting without design, occupying oneself without making a business of it, finding the great in what is the small, and the many in the few, repaying injury with kindness, effecting difficult things while they are easy, and managing great things in their beginnings, is the method of Tao.

All difficult things have their origin in that which is easy, and the great things in that which is small.

Therefore the wise man can accomplish great things without even attempting them.

He who lightly assents will seldom keep his word.

He who accounts all things easy will have many difficulties.

Therefore the Sage takes great account of small things, and so never has any difficulty.

Embrace Your Difficulties

Embrace your difficulties

as they arise in your relationship.

You belong to the Tao and to each other

and therefore need not fear problems.

Since you are not afraid,

you welcome the problems

while they are still small.

Since they are small,

they resolve themselves.

If you are annoyed

or bothered by something.

Don't be afraid to face it honestly.

You may see that it is trivial

and dismiss it without mention.

Or you may need to bring it up

in the safety of your love.

Either way it becomes a tool

of growth and maturity

instead of a stumbling stone.

Act without action. Do without ado. Taste without tasting.

Whether it is big or small, many or few, repay hatred with virtue.

Prepare for the difficult while it is still easy. Deal with the big while it is still small.

Difficult undertakings have always started with what is easy. And great undertakings have always started with what is small.

Therefore the sage never strives for the great, And thereby the great is achieved.

He who makes rash promises surely lacks faith. He who takes things too easily will surely encounter much difficulty.

For this reason even the sage regards things as difficult. And therefore he encounters no difficulty.

Men knowing
the way of life

Do without acting,

Effect without enforcing,

Taste without consuming;

'Through the many they find the few,

Through the humble the great;'

They 'respect their foes,'

They 'face the simple fact before it becomes involved,

Solve the small problem before it becomes big.'

The most involved fact in the world

Could have been faced when it was simple,

The biggest problem in the world

Could have been solved when it was small.

The simple fact that he finds no problem big

Is a sane man's prime achievement.

If you say yes too quickly

You may have to say no,

If you think things are done too easily

You may find them hard to do:

If you face trouble sanely

It cannot trouble you.

Treat lack of achievement as the achievement,

treat lack of accomplishment as the accomplishment,

treat lack of flavor as the flavor.

Make the small big, make the less more, return hatred with DE.

Solve problems while they are simple; accomplish big things while they are small.

The most difficult tasks in the world can only be finished if you attack them while they are simple;

The most important things in the world can only be accomplished if you start them while they are small.

Therefore, the great men never started with big things, so they accomplished big things.

Promises made easily have no credibility; if you view everything as easy, you will meet many difficulties.

So, the great men tried to find as many difficulties as possible, so they never had difficulties.

Act from the still fulcrum of non-action,

Engage from the still fulcrum of non-engagement,

Experience from the still fulcrum of non-experience.

Regard the insignificant as significant,

Regard the minor as major,

Requite the unkind with kindness.

Meet the difficult while it is still easy,

Solve the major while it is still minor.

Difficult problems of the world always arise from easy ones,

Major issues of the world always arise from minor ones.

Therefore, the sage never deals with major issues,

Yet his action always leads to major accomplishment.

Those who commit lightly are seldom to be trusted.

Those who assume things to be easy are always met with difficulties.

Therefore, the sage assumes everything to be difficult,

And ends up having no difficulty at all.

One does things so that one needs to do nothing.

One takes actions so that one needs no action.

One tastes so that one can appreciate tastelessness.

One values what is small or little, and returns good for evil.

One starts from the easiest to achieve the most difficult.

One starts from the most trivial to achieve the highest.

For it is only by taking easy measures

That one can achieve the most difficult in the world.

It is only by taking trivial steps

That one can achieve the highest in the world.

Therefore, the wise person who never looks important

Is able to be the most important.

Those who make hasty promises can rarely keep them.

Those who think nothing difficult will have many difficulties.

That is why the wise person worries about difficulties

And can therefore solve them successfully.

The Tao can accomplish much without interfering,

it can achieve without forcing,

it can taste the tasteless.

Large or small, many or few,

repay hatred and injury with virtue and compassion.

Accomplish the hard task while it is still easy.

Handle large affairs while they are still small.

For even the most difficult and large of tasks and affairs have a point where they are still easy and small.

Thus it is that the Master never does anything hard or large,

yet he is able to accomplish a great many things.

A rashly made promise oftentimes is not carried through.

And those who think all will be easy do not prepare, and find the way difficult.

So the sage regards all things as being difficult, he prepares,

thus it is that he experiences less difficulty with them.

