===== Chapter 11 =====

Thirty spokes joining together at one hub of a wheel:

Accepting its emptiness

There is the use of the cart.

Shaping clay in order to make a vessel:

Accepting its emptiness

There is the use of the vessel.

Chiseling doors and windows in order to make a room:

Accepting its emptiness

There is the use of the room.

Therefore, having them is considered as being beneficial.

Lacking them is considered as being useful.

Thirty spokes join one hub. The wheel's use comes from emptiness.

Clay is fired to make a pot. The pot's use comes from emptiness.

Windows and doors are cut to make a room. The room's use comes from emptiness.

Therefore, Having leads to profit, Not having leads to use.

Thirty spokes join together in a wheel's hub,

It is the center hole that makes the wheel useful.

We shape clay to fashion jugs;

It is the hollowness within that makes a jug useful.

We cut doors and windows in a house wall;

It is these empty spaces that make the house useful.

Thus things are valuable because of what they have

And they are useful because of what they lack.

THE EMPTY

While thirty spokes are the substance

of the cartwheel,

The empty space within the hub and between

the spokes permits the wheel to be useful

While clay is the substance of the vessel,

The empty space within permits the vessel

to be useful.

While doors and windows are cut

as the substance of the wall,

The empty space within these enclosures

permits them to be useful.

Thus:

Form is generated by what IS.

Usefulness lies in what IS NOT.

Thirty spokes unite one hub.

Because of its emptiness, the wheel is useful.

Mold the clay and make a vessel.

Because of its emptiness, the vessel is useful.

Cut out windows and doors to build a room.

Because of its emptiness, the room is useful.

Benefits emerge.

Emptiness makes it useful.

THE VALUE OF THE UNEXPRESSED

The thirty spokes join in their nave, that is one; yet the wheel

dependeth for use upon the hollow place for the axle. Clay is shapen to

make vessels; but the contained space is what is useful. Matter is

therefore of use only to mark the limits of the space which is the thing

of real value.

Thirty spikes run into one hub: yet in the emptiness of the wheel liesits essence. From clay a jar is formed: yet in its emptiness lies the essenceof the container. Rooms are made by cutting windows and doors into thewalls, yet in its emptiness lies the essence of the room. The visual mattercan be observed but it is the Invisible that constitutes its true being.

Thirty spokes unite within the nave

But the wheel is only useful because of the cavity inside the nave

Clay is kneaded into vases

But the utility is determined by the cavity

When building a house they leave blank spots in the walls for doors and windows

But the utility of the house depends on the cavity inside

Therefore, that which exists is useful

But the cavity makes it possible

Every positive involves its negative or opposing factor; for example: In order to turn a wheel, although thirty spokes must revolve, the axle must remain motionless; so both the moving and the non-moving are needed to produce revolution.

In order to mold a vase, although one must use clay, he must also provide a hollow space of empty clay; so both clay and the absence of clay are required to produce a vessel.

In order to build a house, although we must establish solid walls, we must also provide doors and windows; so both the impenetrable and penetrable are essential to a useful building.

Therefore, we profit equally by the positive and negative ingredients in each situation.

We put thirty spokes together and call it a wheel;

But it is on the space where there is nothing

That the usefulness of the wheel depends.

We turn clay to make a vessel;

But it is on the space where there is nothing

That the usefulness of the vessel depends.

We pierce doors and windows to make a house;

And it is on these spaces where there is nothing

That the usefulness of the house depends.

Therefore just as we take advantage of what is,

We should recognize the usefulness of what is not.

Thirty spokes of the wheel converge

to define a hole.

Clay is molded into pots

to shape emptiness.

Walls are hammered into rooms

to enclosed space.

Windows are cut into walls

to frame absence.

Though things may have value,

without no-thing they are useless.

Thirty spokes converge in one hub

Then depending upon what does not exist

is the vehicle's usefulness

Mold clay in order to produce a vessel

Then depending upon what does not exist

is the vessel's usefulness

Cut out doors and windows in order to make a dwelling

Then depending upon what does not exist

is the dwelling's usefulness

Thus, the existence of something serves to make value

The lack of something serves to make utility

Wealth and worth

Thirty spokes unite in the wheel's hub;

It is precisely where there is nothing,

that makes the wheel so useful.

We shape and fire clay into a vessel;

It is precisely the space within that makes the clay pots so useful.

We chisel out the doors and windows for a room;

It is precisely in these empty spaces that makes the room so useful.

Therefore benefit comes from what is there;

Usefulness comes from what is not there.

Thirty spokes meet at a hollowed-out hub; the wheel won't work without its hole.

A vessel is moulded from solid clay; its inner emptiness makes it useful.

To make a room, you have to cut doors and windows; without openings, a place isn't livable.

To make use of what is here, you must make use of what is not.

Thirty spokes unite around a single hub:

Thus a wheel is made.

Yet it is the formless core

That makes the wagon roll.

Clay is formed and baked:

Thus a cup is made.

Yet it is the invisible interior

From which we drink.

Framed walls and brick are joined

To make a house.

Yet it is the open space within

That makes it livable,

That gives doors and windows

Their unique functions.

Therefore, make being your element,

But non-being, your life.

What you see is barely the beginning of what is really there. In a culture such as ours, with its unceasing obsession with the exploitation of the marketplace and the accumulation of object-attachments, there is an urgent practicality to this message. If your inner house is so cluttered with form and outer convenience that there is no more space to support that form, then the invisible realm is ignored, and the inner space of freedom and autonomy is repressed, buried amid accumulation.

Some may recognize this as a principle of the now popular Chinese environmental art known as Feng Shui. Lao Tzu would probably remind us that "good Feng Shui" begins from within one's own being, and that this in turn depends on our own continuing inner sensation of that deep space from which our outer life is shaped. If the space within is muddled amid the repressive influence of acculturation and attachment, then our surroundings will appear concomitantly muddled, and what others perceive and experience of our personality will be similarly blurred and superficial. But if we honor the "open space within," then we will be led to clarity, and life can then become an effortless dance of Te. This, indeed, is the kind of Feng Shui that Lao Tzu would have us become familiar with, before we turn to the arrangement of the forms and objects of our environmental life.

Thirty spokes unite at the hub of a wheel

but the ultimate use of the wheel

depends on the part where nothing exists.

Clay
is molded into a vessel

but the ultimate use of the vessel

depends on the part where nothing exists.

Doors
and windows are cut from the walls of a house

but the ultimate use of the house

depends on the part where nothing exists.

So
there is advantage in using

what can be seen, what does exist.

There
is also advantage in using

the invisible, the non-existent.

Thirty spokes meet in one hub, but the need for the cart existed when as yet it was not. Clay is fashioned into vessels, but the need for the vessel existed when as yet it was not. Doors and windows are cut out to make a house, but the need for the house existed when as yet it was not. Hence there is a profitableness in that which is and a need in that which is not.

Thirty spokes unite in one nave, And because of the part where nothing exists we have the use of a carriage wheel.

Clay is moulded into vessels, And because of the space where nothing exists we are able to use them as vessels.

Doors and windows are cut out in the walls of a house, And because they are empty spaces, we are able to use them.

Therefore, on the one hand we have the benefit of existence, and on the other, we make use of non-existence.

The Value of Non-existence

Thirty spokes together make one hub.

Where the nothing is, lies the cart's use.

Throwing clay to deem: make a utensil;

Where the nothing is, lies the utensil's use.

Sculpting windows and doors to deem: make a room;

Where the nothing is, lies the room's use.

So where we deem having it as beneficial.

We deem use to consist in lacking it.

Thirty spokes are joined at the hub.

From their non-being arises the function of the wheel.

Lumps of clay are shaped into a vessel.

From their non-being arises the function of the vessel.

Doors and windows are constructed together to make a chamber.

From their non-being arises the function of the chamber.

Therefore, as individual beings, these things are useful materials.

Constructed together in their non-being, they give rise to function.

Thirty spokes share one hub, yet the spokes and the hub cannot make use of the carriage.

Mix water, mud and earth and they can be shaped into a vessel, yet they cannot make use of the vessel itself.

Cut out windows and doors to create a room, yet they cannot make use of the room itself.

Therefore take the useful as the useless, the useless as the useful.

Thirty spokes share a hub;

In its nothingness

Rests the carriage's usefulness.

One burns clay to make a pot;

In its nonbeing

Rests the clay pot's usefulness.

One cuts out doors and windows;

In its nonbeing

Rests the room's usefulness.

Therefore, being provides the advantage;

Nonbeing provides the usefulness.

Thirty spokes unite in the middle of the wheel,

And because of the part between them where nothing exists,

We enjoy the use of the carriage wheel.

Clay is formed into bowls and vessels,

And because of the hollow in it where nothing exists,

We use them as vessels.

Doors and windows are cut into the walls of the house,

And since they are empty space, we can use them.

Therefore, on the one hand, we have the advantage of what exists,

And, on the other, we utilize the non-existent.

Without that which does not exist, we cannot take advantage of the wheel, the vessel, or the house.

Without wooden spokes, clay, and walls, we cannot take advantage of the space they contain.

Ultimately, existence and non-existence coexist and are intertwined.

Thirty spokes share one hub.

Adapt the nothing therein to the purpose in hand, and you will have the use
of the cart.

Knead clay in order to make a vessel.

Adapt the nothing therein to the purpose in hand, and you will have the use
of the vessel.

Cut out doors and windows in order to make a room.

Adapt the nothing therein to the purpose in hand, and you will have the use
of the room.

Thus
what we gain is Something, yet it is by virtue of Nothing that this can be put
to use.

The Function of the Non-Existent

Thirty spokes unite in one nave and on that which is non-existent [on the hole in the nave] depends the wheel's utility. Clay is moulded into a vessel and on that which is non-existent [on its hollowness] depends the vessel's utility. By cutting out doors and windows we build a house and on that which is non-existent [on the empty space within] depends the house's utility.

Therefore, existence renders actual but non-existence renders useful.

Without the hole in the tap, the water cannot flow. A cup has form for the emptiness inside. Houses have four walls and a roof, but the space inside is where we live. Things seem to exist, but arise from non-existence.

Thirty spokes share one hub.

The hollow in the hub expresses the carriage's usefulness.

With clay, a vessel is molded.

The hollow within expresses the vessel's usefulness.

With doors and windows, a room is formed.

The hollow within expresses the room's usefulness.

Thus, visible provides the facility; hollow expresses its usefulness.

Thirty spokes gathered at each hub: absence makes the cart work.

A storage jar fashioned out of clay: absence makes the jar work.

Doors and windows cut in a house: absence makes the house work.

Presence gives things their value, but absence makes them work.

Thirty spokes are joined around the wheel's hub,

Its non-being makes the carriage useful.

Clay is molded to make a pot,

Its non-being provides the utility.

Doors and windows are cut to make a room,

Their utility is furnished by non-being.

Therefore,

Being only facilitates, non-being provides utility.

Thirty
spokes converge at one hub

The use of a chariot is in the presence of what is absent

Shaping clay, it happens to act as a vessel

The use of a vessel is in the presence of what is absent

Cutting doors and windows to have it act as a room

The use of a room is in the presence of what is absent.

So

Where there is presence beneficial actions happen

Where there is absence useful actions happen.

A wheel is made of thirty perceptible spokes, but it turns due to the imperceptible central axis of the hub.

Vessels are made of perceptible clay, but it is their imperceptible hollow that is useful.

The imperceptible holes which make the doors and windows of a house, are its essentials.

It is the imperceptible that produces effects and results.

Thirty spokes join in one hub

In its emptiness, there is the function of a vehicle

Mix clay to create a container

In its emptiness, there is the function of a container

Cut open doors and windows to create a room

In its emptiness, there is the function of a room

Therefore, that which exists is used to create benefit

That which is empty is used to create functionality

In a wheel, thirty spokes come together in one hub. The hole in the center of the hub - the place where it is empty - is what makes the wheel useful as part of a vehicle.

When we mix clay to create a container, we notice that it is the empty space in the center of the container that give it the usefulness of holding things.

When we cut open a wall to make space for windows and doors, we notice that it is these openings that make the room truly useful to us. If such openings did not exist, we would have no way of accessing the room!

Therefore, we can see how we create solid objects to provide us with benefits and convenience, but it is actually the emptiness formed by, or embedded in such objects that really provide them with functionality and usefulness.

THE VALUE OF NON-EXISTENCE

Although the wheel has thirty spokes its utility lies in the emptiness of the hub. The jar is made by kneading clay, but its usefulness consists in its capacity. A room is made by cutting out windows and doors through the walls, but the space the walls contain measures the room's value.

In the same way matter is necessary to form, but the value of reality lies in its immateriality.

(Or thus: a material body is necessary to existence, but the value of a life is measured by its immaterial soul.)

Thirty spokes share one hub to make a wheel.

Through its non-being (wu),

There is (yu) the use (yung) of the carriage.

Mold clay into a vessel (ch'i).

Through its non-being (wu),

There is (yu) the use (yung) of the vessel.

Cut out doors and windows to make a house.

Through its non-being (wu),

There is (yu) the use (yung) of the house.

Therefore in the being (yu-chih) of a thing,

There lies the benefit (li).

In the non-being (wu-chih) of a thing,

There lies its use (yun).

Thirty spokes unite at the hub but the ultimate use of the wheel depends on the part where nothing exists.

Clay is molded into a vessel but the ultimate use of the vessel depends upon the part where nothing exists.

Doors and windows are cut out of the walls of a house but the ultimate use of the house depends upon the parts where nothing exists.

So, there is advantage in using what can be seen, what exists. And there is also advantage in using what cannot be seen, what is non-existent.

Thirty spokes are joined in the hub of the wheel,

but it is the center hole, where it is empty,

that makes the wheel useful.

We make a clay pot,

but it is the emptiness inside that makes the pot useful.

We cut windows and doors to make a room,

but it is the inner emptiness that makes the room useful.

We seek to take advantage of what is,

but we also find much use for what is not.

Eleven

Thirty spokes share the wheel's hub;

It is the center hole that makes it useful.

Shape clay into a vessel;

It is the space within that makes it useful.

Cut doors and windows for a room;

It is the holes which make it useful.

Therefore benefit comes from what is there;

Usefulness from what is not there.

Thirty spokes share one hub.

It is just the space (the Nothingness) between them

That makes a cart function as a cart.

Knead clay to make a vessel

And you find within it the space

That makes a vessel as a vessel.

To build a house with doors and windows

And you find within them the space

That makes a house function as a house.

Hence the Being (substance) can provide a condition

Under which usefulness is found,

But the Nothingness (space) is the usefulness itself.

Thirty spokes share one hub;

On its non-being depends the usefulness of the wheel.

You make a vessel, kneading clay;

On its non-being depends the usefulness of the vessel.

You make a room, carving out doors and windows;

On its non-being depends the usefulness of the room.

Therefore, being's advantage

Is non-being's usefulness.

Thirty spokes come together at the hub.

The empty hub houses the axle of the wheel, and this allows the cart to move.

You mould clay to make utensils.

The empty space of the container makes it useful.

While building a house, you put in windows and doors.

The empty space gives us the room to use.

The substantial part creates the space, and thus provides us the benefit.

However, it is in the empty space that the actual utility lies.

Utility of Non-Being

Wu Yung

Thirty spokes converge on the nave of a wheel:

It is where there is non-being (hollow space)

That the usefulness of the wheel lies.

Clay is molded into a vessel:

It is where there is non-being

That the usefulness of the vessel lies.

Doors and windows are hewn out to make a room:

It is where there is non-being

That the usefulness of the room lies.

Therefore, while being is valuable,

It is non-being that is useful.

Thirty converging spokes combine to form a wheel;

But it is the point of nothingness as the centre that determines the wheel's usefulness.

We fashion clay into a pot;

But it is the nothingness within the walls of clay that gives the vessel its usefulness.

We pierce the walls of a house to make the windows and doors;

And their usefulness consists in their being fitted round nothingness.

Thus we profit not only by what is, but by what is not.

Thirty spokes share one hub;

In emptiness lies the wheel's utility.

Kneading clay makes a pot;

In emptiness lies the pot's utility.

Cutting doors and windows makes a room;

In emptiness lies the room's utility.

Gain can be had from somethingness,

But use can be had from nothingness.

Thirty spokes together make a wheel for a cart.

It is the empty space in the center which enables it to be used.

Mold clay into a vessel;

it is the emptiness within that creates the usefulness of the vessel.

Cut out doors and windows in a house;

it is the empty space inside that creates the usefulness of the house.

Thus, what we have may be something substantial,

but its usefulness lies in the unoccupied, empty space.

The substance of your body is enlivened by maintaining the part of you that is unoccupied.

XI.

Use
of the Immaterial

Thirty
spokes unite in a nave, but the nothingness in the hub

Gives
to the wheel its usefulness, for thereupon it goes round;

The
potter kneads the clay as he works, with many a twist and rub,

But
in the nothingness within, the vessel's use is found;

Doors
and windows cut in the walls thereby a room will make,

But
in its nothingness is found the room s utility;

So
the profit of existences is only for the sake

Of
non-existences, where all the use is found to be.

Thirty spokes surround one nave, the usefulness of the wheel is always in that empty innermost.

You fashion clay to make a bowl, the usefulness of the bowl is always in that empty innermost.

You cut out doors and windows to make a house, their usefulness to a house is always in their empty space.

Therefore profit comes from external form, but usefulness comes from the empty innermost.

Thirty
Spokes

converge
upon a single hub;

It
is on

the
hole in the center

that
the use

of
the cart hinges.

We
make a bowl or cup

from
a lump of clay;

It
is the empty space

within
the vessel

that
makes it useful.

We
make doors

and
windows

for
a room;

It
is the

empty
spaces

that
make the

room
livable.

Thus,

Take
advantage of

what
is visible,

By
making use of

What
is not visible.

Though thirty spokes may be joined in one hub, the utility of the carriage lies in what is not there.

Though clay may be moulded into a vase, the utility of the vase lies in what is not there

Though doors and windows may be cut to make a house, the utility of the house lies in what is not there.

Therefore, taking advantage of what is, we recognize the utility of what is not.

The thirty spokes unite in the one nave; but it is on the empty

space (for the axle), that the use of the wheel depends. Clay is

fashioned into vessels; but it is on their empty hollowness, that

their use depends. The door and windows are cut out (from the walls)

to form an apartment; but it is on the empty space (within), that its

use depends. Therefore, what has a (positive) existence serves for

profitable adaptation, and what has not that for (actual) usefulness.

Thirty spokes converge on the single hub of a wheel,
but it is the empty
hole in the middle which makes a cart possible.
Clay
must be shaped with skill to make a pot,
but it is the empty hole in the
middle which makes it useful.
Cut
doors and windows into four walls to make a room,
but it is the empty space
between them that makes it comfortable.
Therefore,
while benefits may be derived from something,
it is in EMPTY NOTHING that
we find usefulness.

The
empty hub at center

Allows a wheel to roll

The vacancy within defines

The function of a bowl

The
openness within a house

Provides location to reside

The open space that is my heart

Is where ten thousand things abide

THIRTY spokes converge upon a single hub;

It is on the hole in the center that the use of the cart hinges.

We make a vessel from a lump of clay;

It is the empty space within the vessel that makes it useful.

We make doors and windows for a room;

But it is these empty spaces that make the room livable.

Thus, while the tangible has advantages,

It is the intangible that makes it useful.

We join spokes together in a hub,

but it is the center hole that provides the utility of the wheel.

We form clay into a container,

but it is the emptiness inside

that holds whatever we want.

We build walls for a house,

But it is the empty space inside

that we live in.

Therefore: we work with being,

But it is in non-being that there is true usefulness.

Thirty spokes are joined together in a wheel,

but it is the center hole

that allows the wheel to function.

We
mold clay into a pot,

but it is the emptiness inside

that makes the vessel useful.

We
fashion wood for a house,

but it is the emptiness inside

that makes it livable.

We
work with the substantial,

but the emptiness is what we use.

Pay attention to silence. What is happening when nothing is happening in a group? That is the group field.

Thirteen people sit in a circle, but it is climate or the spirit in the center of the circle, where nothing is happening, that determines the nature of the group field.

Learn to see emptiness. When you enter an empty house, can you feel the mood of the place? It is the same with a vase or a pot; learn to see the emptiness inside; which is the usefulness of it.

People's speech and actions are figural events. They give the group form and content.

The silences and empty spaces, on the other hand, reveal the group's essential mood, the context for everything that happens. That is the group field.

Thirty spokes join together at one hub,

But it is the hole in the center that makes it operable.

Clay is molded into a pot,

But it is the emptiness inside that makes it useful.

Doors and windows are cut to make a room,

It is the empty spaces that we use.

Therefore, existence is what we have,

But non-existence is what we use.

Thirty
spokes converge on the wheel's hub.

But the center hole which receives the axle

makes it useful.

Clay
is shaped into a pot.

But the inner space which receives whatever

one puts into it makes it useful.

Wood
is cut and joined to build a house.

But the windows and doors which allow

things to enter and leave make it

useful.

The
potential utility resides in the tangible.

But true usefulness is a manifestation of

the intangible.

Thirty spokes join at the hub,

but the space between them makes the cart useful.

Capacity defines a vessel,

but emptiness makes it useful.

Doors and windows define a house,

but emptiness makes the house livable.

Being defines a resource,

while non-Being governs its use.

Thirty spokes are fixed to the hub;

It is the hole in the hub which makes the wheel useful.

Clay can be shaped into a vessel;

But it is the space inside which gives it its usefulness.

Doors and windows are cut out to make a room;

The room is useful only because of the holes.

Therefore, gain from what does exist,

And make use of what doesn't exist.

Thirty strokes radiate from the axle,

And there is a good working cart when it is empty.

Clay is given shapes for holding things,

And there is a good working ware when it is not full.

Windows and doors have been made,

And there is a good working house when it is not occupied.

Therefore, in general principle,

Seeking after being is for profit,

Keeping non-being is for use.

Thirty spokes unite in one hollow hub in this 'nothing' lies the wheel's usefulness.

Knead clay to make a jar - in its 'nothing' lies the jar's usefulness.

Cut out doors and windows in making a house - in their 'nothing' lies the house's usefulness.

Yes: 'Being' makes for profit 'Nothing' makes for use fulness.

Thirty spokes are united in one bicycle wheel. But the use of wheel depends also on the space between the spokes.

Vessels are made of clay. Yet their usefulness depends on the empty space inside them.

Buildings consist of walls, doors, windows. Yet building's usefulness depends also on the space in it.

This is the relation between usefulness of objects and emptiness.

Although there are 30 spokes around wheels' hub,

Its usefulness is given by the emptiness in the middle.

The clay vessel is useful

Because of the empty space given by its form.

A house made of walls, windows and doors,

Is useful through the space created.

Although we give value to things that exist,

We use in fact something that does not exist.

Thirty
spokes surround one hub. At that point of void lies the utility of the cart.
Mold clay to make pots. In the void lies the functionality of the vessel. Fashion
doors and windows in order to make a dwelling. In the void lies the functionality
of the house. So what is substantial [in each case] provides the configuration
and what is void provides the functionality.

Thirty spokes converge in a nave;

just because of its nothingness [void] the usefulness of the cart exists.

Molded clay forms a vessel;

just because of its nothingness [hollowness] the usefulness of the utensil exists.

Doors and windows are cut into a house;

just because of their nothingness [emptiness] the usefulness of the house exists.

Therefore, profit from that which exists and utilize that which is absent.

Using What Is Not

Thirty spokes converge at one hub;

What is not there makes the wheel useful.

Clay is shaped to form a vessel;

What is not there makes the vessel useful.

Doors and windows are cut to form a room;

What is not there makes the room useful.

Therefore, take advantage of what is there,

By making use of what is not.

Wei is what we do. Wu-wei is how we live. We put a roof over our heads to protect us from the elements. But it is the space inside where our family grows. I have a wooden vessel to carry water from my well to my house. But it is the inside that contains the elixir. It is what we don't see that makes us full.

Thirty spokes will converge

In the hub of a wheel;

But the use of the cart

Will depend on the part

Of the hub that is void.

With
a wall all around A clay bowl is molded;

But the use of the bowl

Will depend on the part

Of the bowl that is void.

Cut
out windows and doors

In the house as you build;

But the use of the house

Will depend on the space

In the walls that is void.

So
advantage is had

From whatever is there;

But usefulness rises

From whatever is not.

Thirty spokes are united in one nave to make a wheel,

But it is on the hole of the nave that the use of the carriage depends.

Clay is mixed to mold a utensil,

But it is on its empty space that the use of the utensil depends.

Doors and windows are cut out to form a room,

But it is on the vacancy within, that the use of the room depends.

Therefore, the advantage that existence brings to people rests exclusively upon the decisive role of nonexistence.

Thirty spokes share one hub.

It is exactly where there is nothing of it that the functionality of the wheel resides.

Mix clay with water to make a vessel.

It is exactly where there is nothing of it that the functionality of the vessel resides.

Cut doors and windows to make a room.

It is exactly where there is nothing of it that the functionality of the room resides.

Therefore this is how what is there provides benefit and how what is not there provides functionality.

1. Thirty spokes unite in one hub;

2. It is precisely where there is nothing, that we find the usefulness of the
wheel.

3. We fire clay and make vessels;

4. It is precisely where there's no substance, that we find the usefulness of
clay pots.

5. We chisel out doors and windows;

6. It is precisely in these empty spaces, that we find the usefulness of the
room.

7. Therefore, we regard having something as beneficial;

8. But having nothing as useful.

A wheel has
spokes,

but it rotates around a hollow center.

A pot is made
out of clay or glass,

but you keep things in the empty space inside.

A house is made
out of wood or brick,

but you live in the space between the walls.

We work with
something,

but we use nothing.

.

Use What Does Not Exist

Thirty spokes are united around the hub of a wheel,

but the usefulness of the wheel

depends on the space where nothing exists.

Clay is molded into a vessel,

but the usefulness of the vessel

depends on the space where nothing exists.

Doors and windows are cut out of the walls of a house,

and the usefulness of the house

depends on the space where nothing exists.

Therefore take advantage of what exists,

and use what does not exist.

Thirty spokes meet in one hub

But it upon the empty space the non-existent in the hub that the wheel's usefulness depends.

Kneading clay one moulds vessels of it

But only their hollowness the non-existent makes their filling possible.

With walls from which doors and windows are cut out a house is built

But only its empty space the non-existent gives it its value.

The visible the existent gives form to the work.

The invisible the non-existent gives it essence and meeting.

The Utility of The Void

Lao Tze says,

It takes thirty spokes to share one nave.

Because a nave is a void space, we can have the use of the cart.

People knead clay to make a bowl.

Because a bowl is void in the center, we can use the bowl.

People cut out of a wall to make a door and a window.

Because they are void spaces, we can have the use of apartments.

Thus, this is something we can gain, that the positive existence shall serve for profitable adaption,

and that which has no existence shall serve for its purpose.

THE UTILITY OF NON-EXISTENCE

Though
thirty spokes may form the wheel,

it is the hole within the hub

which gives the wheel utility.

It
is not the clay the potter throws,

which gives the pot its usefulness,

but the space within the shape,

from which the pot is made.

Without
a door, the room cannot be entered,

and without windows it is dark.

Such
is the utility of non-existence.

We join spokes together in a wheel,

but it is the center hole

that makes the wagon move.

We shape clay into a pot,

but it is the emptiness inside

that holds whatever we want.

We hammer wood for a house,

but it is the inner space

that makes it livable.

We work with being,

but non-being is what we use.

To combine two thirty-spoke wheels makes a cart.

Where there is a capacity in it, it possesses the function of a cart.

A lump of clay can be made into pottery.

Where there is a capacity within it, it possesses the function of a vessel.

A house is built with windows and doors.

Where there is a capacity in it, it possesses the function of a house.

Thus to possess a thing is for its utility, while its capacity is its function.

Thirty spokes join at one hub,

Yet it is the emptiness inside the hub that makes the vehicle useful;

Clay is molded into a vessel,

Yet it is the hollowness that makes the vessel useful;

Windows and doors are cut out,

Yet it is their empty space that makes the room usable.

So, any having makes for excess,

Any not-having makes for usefulness.

XI

We
fire clay to make a cup,

But we use the empty space in the center

We build walls to make a room,

But we use the empty space they surround

We form a wheel to spin,

But we need the axle hole to use it

The
point:

Having something is good only to the extent

That it makes nothingness usable

Thirty Spokes

Thirty spokes join at the hub:

their use for the cart

is where they are not.

When the potter's wheel makes a pot,

the use of the pot

is precisely where there is nothing.

When you open doors and windows for a room,

it is where there is nothing

that they are useful to the room.

Therefore being is for benefit,

Nonbeing is for usefulness.

Thirty spokes connected to one hub with a hole (for shaft), can be used as a wheel.

Using clay to make a concave pottery, it can be used as a container.

Buildings with doors and windows can be houses.

Therefore, solidness provides the utility, and hollowness makes things useful.

Thirty spokes converge upon one hub; but it is the center hole that is the use of the cart.

We shape a lump of clay into a vessel; but it is the empty space within the vessel that is its use.

We make doors and windows for a chamber; but it is the empty space within it that is its use.

Thus, while the beings are profitable, the non-being is useful.

Thirty spokes share a wheel hub,

it is the (empty) space (not spokes, nor hub) makes wheel useful.

Shape clay into a vessel,

It is the empty space within, makes it useful.

Cut doors and windows for a room,

It is the holes, make a room a room.

Therefore, what is there defines its form,

what is not there defines its use.

Thirty spokes connect to the wheel's hub;

yet, it is the center hole

that makes it useful.

Clay is shaped into a vessel;

yet, it is the emptiness within

that makes it useful.

Doors and windows are cut for a room;

yet it is the space where there is nothing

that makes it useful.

Therefore,
though advantage comes from what is;

usefulness comes from what is not.

Engine
and alternator and U-joint and tires and accelerator and steering wheel and
headlights and bucket seats

all together make a car,

but it is the space within

inside the empty seats

that makes it

useful.

Clay and glass and plastic are molded to create

jars and vases and cups and bags,

but it is the space inside

that is empty

that makes them

useful.

Houses
and skyscrapers are built

and cut open with doors and windows

because it is the space inside

that is empty

that makes the buildings

useful.

Being
and profit come from

what is there,

usefulness from

what is not.

We put thirty spokes together and call it a wheel; but it's on the space where
there's nothing that the usefulness of the wheel depends.

We turn clay to make a vessel; but it's on the space where there's nothing that
the usefulness of the vessel depends.

We pierce and cut out doors and windows to make a house;

and it's on these spaces where there's nothing that the usefulness of the house
depends.

Take advantage of what is, turn existing into a great advantage: just make as
much as you can out of it here.

Feel free to recognise the possible usefulness of whats not yet here. Prosper
by clever use of something not yet.

Thirty spokes converge on a single hub,

but it is in the space where there is nothing that the usefulness of the cart lies.

Clay is molded to make a pot,

but it is in the space where there is nothing that the usefulness of the clay pot lies.

Cut out doors and windows to make a room,

but it is in the spaces where there is nothing that the usefulness of the room lies.

Therefore,

Benefit may be derived from something, but it is in nothing that we find usefulness.

The thirty spokes of a carriage wheel uniting at the nave are made useful by the hole in the centre, where nothing exists.

Vessels of moulded earth are useful by reason of their hollowness.

Doors and windows are useful by being cut out.

A house is useful because of its emptiness.

Existence, therefore, is like unto gain, but Non-Existence to use.

The Empty Space Within

It is the center of the wheel

where the spokes meet

that enables the wheel to move.

Keep yourselves together at the center

and your relationship will roll smoothly.

It is the empty space within

that makes a bowl useful.

Empty yourselves of agendas for each other

and love will fill your relationship.

It is the space within the walls of a house

that gives a family room to live.

Create a space for each other

free from ''oughts" and "shoulds"

where you both can safely live,

and all manner of joy will be yours.

Is there space in your life

for your beloved to blossom?

Is your physical environment cluttered with stuff?

Is your body contaminated with tensions and toxins?

Is your mind full of noise?

Empty yourself.

Make space.

Thirty spokes are united around the hub to make a wheel, But it is on its non-being that the utility of the carriage depends.

Clay is moulded to form a utensil, But it is on its non-being that the utility of the utensil depends.

Doors and windows are cut out to make a room, But it is on its non-being that the utility of the room depends.

Therefore turn being into advantage, and turn non-being into utility.

Thirty spokes
are made one by holes in a hub,

By vacancies joining them for a wheel's use;

The use of clay in moulding pitchers

Comes from the hollow of its absence;

Doors, windows, in a house,

Are used for their emptiness:

Thus we are helped by what is not

To use what is.

A wooden wheel has thirty spokes:

Carve out the center to make it useful for a carriage.

A piece of clay is used to make a container:

Take out some clay from the middle to form a pot.

A house has four walls:

Empty the inside to make a room.

Therefore, having materials provides the resources,

But getting rid of some of it makes the materials useful.

Thirty spokes share a hub;

The usefulness of the cart

lies in the space where there is nothing.

Clay is kneaded into a vessel;

The usefulness of the vessel

lies in the space where there is nothing.

A room is created by cutting out doors and windows;

The usefulness of the room

lies in the space where there is nothing.

Therefore,

The benefit of things lies in the usefulness of nothing.

Thirty strokes radiate from the axle,

And there is a good working cart when it is empty.

Clay is given shapes for holding things,

And there is a good working ware when it is not full.

Windows and doors have been made,

And there is a good working house when it is not occupied.

Therefore, in general principle,

Seeking after being is for profit,

Keeping non-being is for use.

We join spokes together in a hub,

but it is the center hole that provides the utility of the wheel.

We form clay into a container,

but it is the emptiness inside

that holds whatever we want.

We build walls for a house,

But it is the empty space inside

that we live in.

Therefore: we work with being,

But it is in non-being that there is true usefulness.

