===== Chapter 40 =====

"Return" is the motion of the Tao.

"Weakening" is the function of the Tao.

The world and the ten-thousand things were born to existence.

Existence was born to non-existence.

Reversal is Tao's movement. Yielding is Tao's practice.

All things originate from being. Being originates from non-being.

Returning is the action of Tao.

Yielding is the function of Tao.

The myriad things arise from what there is.

What there is arises from what there is not.

THE NON-BEING

Returning to what was in the beginning,

Is the action of Tao.

Gentleness and yielding is the manner in which

Tao functions and employs itself.

All Things emanate from Being,

And being, most certainly emanates from

Non-Being.

Return to your true nature, the movement of the Tao.

The way of the Tao is gentle.

Ten-thousand things (everything) and Heaven below (the sacred body) were born from its existence.

Existence was born from nonexistence (the Source).

OMITTING UTILITY

The Tao proceeds by correlative curves, and its might is in weakness.

All
things arose from the Teh, and the Teh budded from the Tao.

The movement of the Tao By contraries proceeds;

And weakness marks the course of Tao's mighty deeds.

All things under heaven sprang from it as existing (and named); thatexistence sprang from

It as non-existent (and not named).

One who deviates from the right and simple road

Will be pulled towards it again

This occurs with a mild touch

The whole creation comes into existence

The existing out of the unnameable unexisting

Nature alternates dynamically. When it completes what it is doing, then it starts all over again.

All that is springs from such alternation.

In Tao the only motion is returning;

The only useful quality, weakness.

For though all creatures under heaven are the products of Being,

Being itself is the product of Not-being.

Tao moves by returning and acts by yielding.

Thus, the ten thousand things arise into being.

Being arises from non-being.

Things arise from no-thing.

Reversal is the movement of the way

Yielding is the method of the way

The myriad beings in nature arose out of being

Being arose out of nothing

Application of Tao

Returning is the motion of the Tao.

Weakness is the function of the Tao.

The things of the world

are born of being.

Being is born of not being.

Returning to the root is the movement of Tao. Quietness is how it functions.

The ten thousand things are born of being. Being is born of nothing.

Tao in motion is returning.

Tao in action is accepting.

The vast array of Nature's forms

Evolves within the realm of body,

And the bodily arises from the Formless.

Tao is an endless circle, ever returning.

Serenity is its ultimate function.

Everything rises from existence.

Existence rises from non-existence.

The movements of the Tao are cyclical; the sufficiency of the Tao is latency.

All that is, exists in being, being in non-being.

Returning is the motion of Tao.

Weakness is the appliance of Tao.

All things in the Universe come from existence.

And existence from non-existence.

Reversal

That which is converse is the action of a guide.

That which is weak is the use of a guide.

The cosmos and the ten-thousand natural kinds arise from 'existing.'

'Existing' arises from 'non-existing.'

Reverse is the movement of Tao.

Yielding is the action of Tao.

Ten thousand things in the universe are created from being.

Being is created from non-being.

Returning is the movement of Tao.

Weakness is the use of the Tao.

The myriad creatures under Heaven are born from something.

The something is born from nothing.

Opposition characterizes the Tao's movement;

Weakness characterizes the Tao's function.

All things under heaven are generated from being;

Being is generated from nonbeing.

Going back is the movement of the Tao,

Weakening is the expression of the Tao.

Everything in the universe springs from within existence,

And existence springs from non-existence.

Turning back is how the way moves;

Weakness is the means the way employs.

The
myriad creatures in the world are born from

Something, and Something from Nothing.

Avoiding Activity

"Homeward is Reason's course,

Weakness is Reason's force."

Heaven and earth and the ten thousand things come from existence, but existence comes from non-existence.

All things return to the Tao. The Tao yields to receive them all. Everything appears to be something. Something arises out of nothing.

Periodicity is Direction in motion;

Frailty is Direction in application.

Myriad matters in the world are born out of Ull.

Ull is born out of Null.

Return is the movement of Way, and yielding the method of Way.

All beneath heaven, the ten thousand things: it's all born of being, and being is born of nonbeing.

Tao moves in cycles.

Tao uses the soft and weak to reveal the truth.

All things in the world are born from being, and

Being (the named) is born from non-being (the unnamed).

That
which returns is tao moving

That which lessens is tao using.

The
world, the 10000 things give birth in relation to presence

Presence gives birth in relation to absence.

Going back (towards the Principle) is the type of movement characteristic of those who conform themselves to the Principle. Attenuation is the result of their being conformed to the Principle.

Considering all that exists is born of simple being, and that being is born of formless non-being, they tend, in diminishing themselves without cease, to go back to primordial simplicity.

The returning is the movement of the Tao

The weak is the utilization of the Tao

The myriad things of the world are born of being

Being is born of non-being

That which reverses course, reflects back, or returns to its point of origin characterizes the cyclical motions of the Tao. Because the Tao process underlies everything in existence, we observe its cycles reflected everywhere in the universe.

That which exhibits weakness, a soft touch, or a yielding nature characterizes the function and utilization of the Tao. This is because the Tao drives life forward endlessly, and the living is always pliant and flexible while death is invariably stiff and unyielding.

The above applies to the mind as well. An awareness that is in tune with the Tao is open to possibilities and adaptable to new ways of thinking. In contrast, a mind that stubbornly clings to preconceptions and automatically rejects anything different is, in a real sense, already dead.

AVOIDING ACTIVITY

Retirement is characteristic of Tao just as weakness appears to be a characteristic of its activity.

Heaven and earth and everything are produced from existence, but existence comes from nonexistence. . . .

Returning (fan) is the movement (tung) of Tao.

Weak (jo) is the functioning (yung) of Tao.

Ten thousand things under heaven are born of being (yu).

Being is born of non-being (wu).

Tao is an endless circle, ever returning; serenity is its ultimate function; everything rises from existence; existence rises from non-existence.

Reversal is the motion of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

All things emerge from being.

Being emerges from non–being.

Forty

Returning is the motion of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

The ten thousand things are born of being.

Being is born of not being.

Cycling is the movement of the Tao;

Being weak is the function of the Tao.

All things of the world are born from the Being,

And the Being from the Nothingness.

Turning back is Tao's motion.

Being weak is Tao's function.

The ten thousand things under Heaven are born from being;

Being is born from non-being.

Reversal is the action of Dao.

Soft and weak is the function of Dao.

Everything comes from being.

And being comes from non-being.

Movement and Function

Ch'u Yung

Cyclic reversion is Tao's movement.

Weakness is Tao's function.

All things in the universe are derived from Being.

Being is derived from Non-Being.

The movement of the Tao is a returning.

The chief method of the Tao is non-striving.

All manifestations have their source in Being:

Being has its source in Non-Being.

Returning is the motion of Tao;

Softness is the utility of Tao.

All things in heaven and earth

Are born of being;

Being is born of non-being.

Returning to itself is how the subtle Way of the universe exercises itself.

Being gentle and yielding is how the subtle Way of the universe employs itself.

All things of the world come from the Manifest.

The Manifest comes from the unmanifest, subtle essence of the universe.

XL.

The
Concealed Use

The
movement of the Tao is a returning,

And
weakness marks its course, to our discerning,

But
heaven and earth and everything from its existence came,

And
existence, from the non-existent spurning.

He who returns is sent forth by Tao,

He who is weak is used by Tao.

In the world things are born into existence,

Existing things are born into Inner Life.

The movement of the

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

consists of Returning.

(In science, for every physical action there is a physical reaction. It is

the same in social order.)

The use of the

Tao ( the Laws of the Universe )

consists of perception.

(Understand the root cause and you will understand the process.)

All things

under heaven

are born

of the Visible;

The Visible

is born

of the Invisible.

(The principals that we do not directly perceive create what we see.

Chaos has a pattern if only we use our intuition.)

The movement of the Way is: to reverse.

The method of the Way is: to be weak.

Heaven and earth and the ten thousand things are born out of Being; Being is born out of Non-being.

The movement of the Tao

By contraries proceeds;

And weakness marks the course

Of Tao's mighty deeds.

All
things under heaven sprang from It as existing (and named);

that existence sprang from It as non-existent (and not named).

When a 'superior' person hears of DEI,
they are scarcely able to put
it into practice.
When a 'middling' person hears of DEI,
they appear
to now perservere, now lose it.
When a 'common' person hears of DEI,

they laugh out loud.
If they did not laugh, it could not be DEI!

There
is a series of old sayings, that go;
"The bright Path seems dim.
The
forward Path seems backwards.
The level Path seems bumpy.
Virtuosity
seems like a depression.
Great whiteness seems grimy.
Ample skill seems
insufficient.
Full DEI seems apathetic.
Plain truth seems sullied.
The
great square has no corners.
The great vessel is never completed.
The
great note sounds muted.
The great Image is formless.
The
Path is hidden, and nameless."
Indeed,
this Path alone is good at it's beginning and at it's end.

All
is born of emptiness

Manifests and has its day

Then yields and surrenders

Returns and dies away

Commentary

THE movement of the Tao consists in Returning.

The use of the Tao consists in softness.

All things under heaven are born of the corporeal:

The corporeal is born of the Incorporeal.

The Tao moves, and returns again. It functions with a soft gentleness.

Its use is realized through humility and quiet softness.

All of creation is made from tangible being; Tao created all being from nothing.

All movement returns to the Tao.

Weakness is how the Tao works.

All
of creation is born from substance.

Substance is born of nothing-ness.

Learn to return to your self.

Become silent: What is happening when nothing is happening?

Can you tell the difference between what is happening and how it happens?

Can you sense how what is happening arises out of how it happens?

Process... and principle.

Returning is the movement of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

All things in the world are born of being.

Being is born of non-being.

Manifesting
and disintegrating is the

activity of Infinity.

Yielding
to manifestations, yielding to

disintegration

is the nature of peace and harmony.

Things
are manifested from the tangible.

The tangible is manifested from the intangible.

Action is the opposite of Tao.

Weakness is the function of Tao.

All things under Heaven were created from Something.

Something was created from Nothing.

The motion of Tao is to return.

The Way of Tao is to yield.

The Ten Thousand Things have their source in being;

Being arises from non-being.

Polar opposition helps the movement of the Way.

Weakness is the condition for the use of the Way.

Everything is developed from being,

And being is developed from non-being.

Turning Back is Tao movement being Weak is Tao practice.

"The thousands of things in the world are born of Being" Being is born of Nothing.

Interaction of the opposites is the sphere of Tao's activity.

The Highest Subtlety is one of the most important qualities of Tao. It is opposed by coarse qualities of evil people.

All the development of incarnate beings goes on in interaction of these opposites.

Yet, the very world of matter originated from the Subtlest Source...

In motion, Tao always returns to the source,

Starting from a lower position is the eternal way to begin.

All things are produced by manifestation,

Manifestation comes from non-manifestation.

Recirculation
is [characteristic of] the motion of the Dao. Weakness is [characteristic of
] the functioning of the Dao. The myriad creatures of the world are produced
out of things that exist. Existence is produced from non-existence.

Returning is Tao's motion.

Weakness is Tao's function.

All things in the world are produced by being.

And being is produced by non-being.

The Way

Polarity is the movement of the Tao.

Receptivity is the way it is used.

The world and All Things were produced from its existence.

Its existence was produced from nonexistence.

Return to the simple. Yield like the tree in the wind. In the words of Lao Tzu, "All things are born of being. Being is born of all things." Your children are born of your love. Love is realized in your children.

The movement of the Way is a return;

In weakness lies its major usefulness.

From What-is all the world of things was born

But What-is sprang in turn from What-is-not.

Reversion is the movement of Tao,

Weakness is the function of Tao.

All things under Heaven come into being from (visible) concrete beings,

An all beings come into being from invisible nonexistence (Tao).

Reversion is the action of the Dao.

Softness is the function of the Dao.

The myriad things under Heaven achieve life in existence.

Existence arises from nothingness.

1. "Reversal" is the movement of the Dao;

2. "Weakness" is the function of the Dao.

3.
The things of the world originate in being,

4. And being originates in nonbeing.

Tao is always
heading

back to where it came from.

Tao advances by not pressing forward.

Things exist
because they are.

They are because they once were not.

.

Movement of the Way

Returning is the movement of the Way.

Gentleness is the method of the Way.

All things in the world come from being,

and being comes from non-being.

Back to the source the way and motion of Tao are leading Non-action is its will and essence.

All creatures and things arise from Being but Being is rooted in Non-Being.

Being and Non-Being

Lao Tze says,

Reverse movement is how the Tao does go;

gentleness is the course it chooses to show.

All existence under heaven sprang from Being;

that Being sprang from Non-being.

BEING AND NOT BEING

The
motion of nature

is cyclic and returning.

Its way is to yield,

for to yield is to become.

All things are born of being;

being is born of non-being.

Return is the movement of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

All things are born of being.

Being is born of non-being.

To return is to complete the movement - change.

To be tender is a virtue of Dao.

Universe (Heaven and Earth) and All Things were given birth by Existence.

Existence was given birth by Unknown-Existence.

Tao moves by returning.

Tao functions by weakness.

All things under heaven are born of being.

Being is born of nonbeing.

XL

The
tao is always returning, always yielding

The creatures of the world are born of those like them

And give birth to those like them in turn

But where does birth come from?

It
is tao

Return Is the Movement of the Way

Return is the movement of the Way;

yielding is the function of the Way.

All things in the world are born of being;

being is born of nonbeing.

According to Tao, recurrence is the way of motion.

According to Tao, flexibility is the way of application.

The all things in the world come from the visible, which comes from the invisible.

Return is the movement of the Way.

Weakness is the use of the Way.

All things under heaven are born from being.

Being is born from non-being.

The opposite (relativity) is the result of the motion of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

Everything is born of being.

Being is born of Nothingness.

Returning is the direction of the Tao.

Yielding is the way of the Tao.

The
ten thousand things are born of Being

and Being is born of Nonbeing.

Returning
is the natural movement of nature.

Letting go is nature's predominant quality.

Even though all being comes from something,

something itself comes from nothing.

Reversion is the action of dao. In dao the only motion is a return;

and the one useful quality is named soft [or polite] gentleness, So polite or
weak gentleness [or humility] is the function of dao.

The creatures and things of this world come from being. And being from not-yet-being.
though all

Reversal is the movement of the Way;

Weakness is the usage of the Way.

All creatures under heaven are born from being;

Being is born from nonbeing.

The path of the Tao is backward.

The characteristic of Tao is gentleness.

Everything in the universe comes from existence, and existence from non-existence.

Here Is Where Your Love Was Born

Let your shoulders drop and your eyes close.

Soften your muscles and remember a child's flexibility.

Breathe deeply and let your busy thoughts fade away.

There is a place of stillness and quiet

underneath your thoughts.

Here is where your love was born.

Some call it meditation.

Some call it relaxation.

Some call it prayer.

Whatever you call it,

do it.

It is the center

from which the rest of your life emerges.

Without it

your relationship is a carefully acted play.

Reversion is the action of Tao. Weakness is the function of Tao.

All things in the world come from being. And being comes from non-being.

Life on its
way returns into a mist,

Its quickness is its quietness again:

Existence of this world of things and men

Renews their never needing to exist.

Cycling is how the DAO moves;

The weak is where the DAO functions.

Everything comes from existence;

Existence comes from nothingness.

Cyclic returning to the source is the rhythmic movement of the Tao.

Gentle spontaneity is the nature of its function.

All beings derive their beingness from Being, which is the Tao.

And Being arises in and as Nothingness, which is the Tao.

Polar opposition helps the movement of the Way.

Weakness is the condition for the use of the Way.

Everything is developed from being,

And being is developed from non-being.

The Tao moves, and returns again. It functions with a soft gentleness.

Its use is realized through humility and quiet softness.

All of creation is made from tangible being; Tao created all being from nothing.

