===== Chapter 31 =====

Those who delight in the military are instruments of ill fortune—

Nature perhaps detests them.

Therefore, those who possess the Tao do not dwell [with them].

Sovereign masters, [while at] home, necessarily value the left.

Using the military necessarily values the right.

Those who are warlike are instruments of ill fortune

Not the instruments of the sovereign master.

[When the situation is] already disharmonious

And [they have to] use them

[They do so] calmly, without relish, [thus] becoming superior.

[They] "win" but do not delight [in it].

And those who delight in it

Indeed enjoy killing people.

Those who enjoy killing people

Are necessarily unable to obtain their ambitions in the world.

Fortunate affairs honor the left.

Unfortunate affairs honor the right.

The subordinate general occupies the left.

The commanding general occupies the right.

It is said they use funerary rites to commemorate them.

A multitude of people [have been] killed—

Therefore mourn, lament, and weep for them.

[After] overcoming [them] in war

Use funerary rites to commemorate them.

Fine weapons are ill-omened tools. They are hated. Therefore the old Tao ignores them.

At home, honour the left. In war, honor the right.

Good omens honour the left. Bad omens honour the right. The lieutenant
on the left, The general on the right As in funeral ceremonies.

Weapons are ill-omened, Not proper instruments. When their use can't be
avoided, Calm restraint is best. Don't think they are beautiful. Those
who think they are beautiful Rejoice in killing people.

Those who rejoice in killing people Cannot achieve their purpose in this world.

When many people are killed We feel sorrow and grief. A great victory Is a funeral ceremony.

Fine weapons are the portents of evil.

Creatures seem to detest them.

So the people of Tao keep away from them.

In times of peace the wise favor the left side.

In times of war they favor the right.

Weapons are the portents of evil.

Not the tools of the wise.

Compelled to use them,

They do so without zeal.

Winning a victory,

They do not relish in it.

Those who delight in victory

Delight in the slaughter of people.

Those who delight in slaughter

Cannot attain their goals.

On happy occasions the left is the place of honor.

On mournful occasions - the right.

The rites of war are like the funeral rites:

The generals stand on the left,

The commander-in-chief on the right.

When multitudes are killed the mourners should grieve.

A war victory should be celebrated like a funeral.

ARMS AND WEAPONS

Arms and weapons,

Being instruments of destruction, Are despised by all.

They are avoided by followers of the Tao.

As instruments of evil, they are spurned by good leaders,

Being used with calm restraint only when no other choice prevails.

A good leader does not regard victory with rejoicing,

For to delight in victory is to delight

in the slaughter of people.

To delight in slaughter is to fail

in one's purpose.

In ancient social custom -

The left is the place of honor

for ceremonies at home.

At war, the place of honor is at the right.

Thus,

Good omen and happy occasions favor the left.

Ill omen and such sad occasions as

funeral rites, favor the right.

Observe then with grief and sorrow the slaughter

accompanying victory of arms, for,

Victory of arms and funeral ceremony

truly share the same rite.

Those who are superior at warfare do not have good fortune.

They are likely to be detested.

The emergence of the Tao does not stop.

The honorable ruler dwells in and emulates this (the Tao) because they favor the left side.

Using weapons emulates and favors the right side.

Weapons are not a blessing and are not useful.

The honorable ruler does not obtain these instruments! Yet they still can function.

Tranquility and quiet become supreme.

Conquering has no beauty because it is as if you rejoice and delight at the slaughter of people.

Truly to rejoice at the killing of people means you will not be able to fulfill your ambitions for Heaven below (the sacred body)!

Joyful activities add to the left side.

Cruel activities add to the right side.

The person who acts from below will approach the battle and dwell in the left side.

The person who acts from above will approach the battle and dwell in the right side.

Speak as though performing funeral rites.

Killing causes the people to grieve and weep with sorrow.

Tremble at victory because life will be like a funeral ceremony.

COMPOSING QUARREL

Arms, though they be beautiful, are of ill omen, abominable to all

created beings. They who have the Tao love not their use.

The
place of honour is on the right in wartime; so thinketh the man of

distinction. Sharp weapons are ill-omened, unworthy of such a man; he

useth them only in necessity. He valueth peace and ease, desireth not

violence of victory. To desire victory is to desire the death of men;

and to desire that is to fail to propitiate the people.

At
feasts, the left hand is the high seat; at funerals, the right. The

second in command of the army leadeth the left wing, the commander-in-

chief, the right wing; it is as if the battle were a rite of mourning!

He that hath slain most men should weep for them most bitterly; so then

the place of the victor is assigned to him with philosophical propriety.

Victorious in restraint, victorious with arrogance, victorious withoutpresumption, victorious without demonstration and offense. Whoever seeksmilitary adventures will perish in them. Such is the fate of rapaciousness.Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen, hateful, itmay be said, to all creatures. Therefore they who have the Tao do not liketo employ them. The superior man ordinarily considers the left hand themost honourable place, but in time of war the right hand. Those sharp weaponsare instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the superior man;-heuses them only on the compulsion of necessity. Calm and repose are whathe prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him undesirable. To considerthis desirable would be to delight in the slaughter of men; and he whodelights in the slaughter of men cannot get his will in the kingdom. Onoccasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized position; onoccasions of mourning, the right hand. The second in command of the armyhas his place on the left; the general commanding in chief has his on theright;-his place, that is, is assigned to him as in the rites of mourning.He who has killed multitudes of men should weep for them with the bitterestgrief; and the victor in battle has his place (rightly) according to thoserites.

How ingenious weaponry may seem to be, though it will always be disastrous rubbish

Everybody hates it

A righteous man saves himself from it

While a true man will not soil his hands with it

A fighter grabs for it

Weapons are not good for meek people

They bring nothing but trouble

One who is wise will never ever use a weapon

Because peace and quietness are more precious to him

He doesn't enjoy victory

Because one who enjoys victory

Enjoys his fellow men getting killed

And one who enjoys their fellow men getting killed

Will never find peace in oneself

Prosperity is considered as a personal merit

Misfortune on the other hand is considered as an ironic freak

Victory is the merit of men

And defeat the blame of the commander

But victory and defeat only brings losers

Weapons have a negative value, for they create fear in others. Therefore, the follower of Nature avoids them.

For when among intimates, one naturally prefers the gentler, more trusting, position on the left. And when among enemies, one naturally jockeys for the more strategic position on the right.

Since weapons have a negative value, the intelligent man will have nothing to do with them if he can. But when he is forced to use them, he does so with reluctance and restraint.

He does not admire conquest. For whoever desires to conquer desires to kill. And whoever delights in murder, cannot inherit the earth.

When things go well, we signify this by honouring the position on the left. When ills prevail, we symbolize this by giving precedence to the position on the right. In military parades, the second in command, who is ordered to give orders, takes his place on the left, While the first in command, who by himself undertakes to give orders, takes the right hand position. There is a significant similarity between fighting and funerals.

Just as the slaughter of many people should be accomplished by weeping and mourning, So the positions in a victory parade should properly parallel those in a funeral procession.

Fine weapons are none the less ill-omened things.

(People despise them, therefore,

Those in possession of the Tao do not depend on them.)

That is why, among people of good birth,

In peace the left-hand side is the place of honour,

But in war this is reversed and the right-hand side is the place of honour.

(Weapons are ill-omened things, which the superior man should not depend on.

When he has no choice but to use them,

The best attitude is to retain tranquil and peaceful.)

The Quietist, even when he conquers, does not regard weapons as lovely things.

For to think them lovely means to delight in them,

And to delight in them means to delight in the slaughter of men.

And he who delights in the slaughter of men

Will never get what he looks for out of those that dwell under heaven.

(Thus in happy events,

The left-hand side is the place of honour, in grief and mourning,

The right-hand is the place of honour.

The lieutenant general stands on the left,

While the supreme general stands on the right,

Which is arranged on the rites of mourning.)

A host that has slain men is received with grief and mourning;

He that has conquered in battle is received with rites of mourning.

Even the finest weapons are instruments of ill omen,

hated and feared by all creatures.

Observers of Tao have no use for them.

At home, a man of virtue gives precedence to the left.

At war, he gives precedence to the right.

Weapons are not the tools of a man of virtue.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen,

to be employed as a last resort.

Do not relish their use

or admire their excellence.

To see weapons as excellent is to relish killing.

If you relish killing you will never find the way.

On joyful occasions, precedence is given to the left.

On sad occasions, precedence is given to the right.

When an army is arrayed, the lieutenant is placed on the left.

The commander is placed on the right.

Thus, war is conducted as a funeral rite.

When multitudes are being killed,

hold in your heart only sorrow.

When victory is achieved,

mark it with mourning.

Even the finest weapons are tools of ill omen

Things somehow wrong to hold

So those who have the way do not linger

A noble one, when home, honors the left

When working with weapons, honors the right

Weapons are tools of ill omen

They are not a noble one's tools

Failing to gain satisfaction and still using them

Calm indifference is best adopted

Even in triumph there is no beauty

And those who are attracted to this

are in fact delighting in the slaughter of others

Now those who delight in the slaughter of others

Are then ill suited for use

in achieving any goal in the world at all

(In) auspicious affairs the left side is honored

(In) adverse affairs the right side is honored

An army's lieutenant commander stays to the left

The army's commander in chief stays to the right

A description of the funeral rites held at the end

Where the slaughter of others amounts to a multitude

Have compassion & lament & weep for them

(When) the battle is won

consider the funeral rites being held here

Tools of violence

As for weapons - they are instruments of ill omen;

And among creatures there are those that hate them.

Therefore, who is a follower of Tao, never use them.

When the wise man is at home, he prefers the left.

When at war, he honors the right.

Therefore, they are not a wise man's tools.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen;

When you have no choice to use them,

It is best to remain trnquil and calm.

You should never look upon them

As things of beauty.

If you see them as beautiful things -

This is to delight the killing of men.

And when you delight in the killing of men;

You will not realize your goal in the land.

Therefore, on happy occasions we honor the left,

But in mourning we honor the right.

Therefore, in the army the general stands on the left,

And the commander-in-chief stands on the right.

Which is so to say, that war is conducted like a funeral.

When multitudes of people are killed,

We stand before them in sorrow and grief.

When we are victorious in battle,

We treat the occasion like a funeral ceremony.

Weapons are tools of evil, shunned and avoided by everything in nature. Because people of Tao follow nature, they want nothing to do with weapons.

Unevolved people are eager to act out of strength, but a person of Tao values peace and quiet. He knows that every being is born of the womb of Tao. This means that his enemies are his enemies second, his own brothers and sisters first.

Thus he resorts to weapons only in the direst necessity, and then uses them with utmost restraint.

He takes no pleasure in victory, because to rejoice in victory is to delight in killing. Whoever delights in killing will not find success in this world.

Observe victories as you observe a death in the family: with sorrow and mourning.

Every victory is a funeral for kin.

When this simplicity is divided, every thing and not-thing needs a name. Once there are names, the process of distinction should stop. To know when to stop is to be free from danger.

Of all the instruments of human ego,

Weapons of war are the most horrible.

The teaching Heart of the Cosmos

Turns away in revulsion from these,

And from those that use them.

The student of the Sage

Embraces the supple form of truth.

The student of war

Hides beneath the stiff shield of delusion.

The former walks in blessing,

The latter strides toward Fate.

When the infantile lord descends

To playing with his toys of war,

He must be resolutely answered

With a calm and firm rejection.

And should he kill and conquer,

Let him not revel in his hideous slaughter;

Let him not exult in extermination.

For he who delights in destruction

Shall never live in the Way of Nature.

Celebrate the living body of truth,

Mourn the madness that is power:

The latter is the seat of appearances,

Where the dead figurehead resides.

Let a dirge of sorrow be sung

For the victorious commander-in-chief.

Lament as well the grievous slaughter he has wrought.

Though we may weep for all his seeming victims,

It is the patriot-that power-drunk demon-

For whom the funeral rites must be observed.

Lao Tzu had no doubt noticed something that we may observe today in our world: those who enjoy the greatest safety from the danger of battle seem to cry the loudest for war. Let them be in governmental offices, in a posh bunker somewhere in a fortified countryside, sitting before a bank of television cameras, or residing in the editorial office of a tabloid newspaper—these are the most likely sources for the call of the hawk. These are the self-styled patriots, the "power drunk demons," as Lao Tzu refers to them, or the "walking dead," as they are referred to by Carol Anthony and Hanna Moog in I Ching: The Oracle of the Cosmic Way:

"...a person who has totally separated from his feeling consciousness, disdaining his feelings and his body. His chi energy is decreased by ignoring and suppressing his true feelings, and by rejecting the Cosmic gift of love. If neglected long enough, his inner light dwindles to a mere set of coals...the Sage calls such a person one 'without head' [in Hexagram 8] because he lacks the ability to further connect with the Cosmic Whole. (p. 731)."

Lao Tzu says that such a person "may be safely met with a calm and firm detachment," and this advice is echoed again in The Oracle of the Cosmic Way:

[A walking dead person] may continue in this state for many years, stealing chi energy from other people. When a person realizes that he is being drained of chi energy in this way, he needs to inwardly disconnect from and remain neutral in the presence of a walking dead person [and] that he not view that person as a culprit, as that too would give him energy. (p. 731).

Thus, the walking dead person, who has killed his own inner truth to feed his ego upon the lives of others, is the very person "for whom the funeral rites must be observed," for he has committed the act of inner suicide that is warned of in Chapter 30. When this true self is lost or repressed, as in one "who descends to playing with the toys of war," then it is the murderous demon that must be expunged, and this can only happen through our calling upon the Sage within such a person, as Lao Tzu indicates in the next poem, Chapter 32. But as long as one "delights in destruction," he will be as if possessed by that demon, and hounded by it—to the very moment of his death, and beyond. Thus, Lao Tzu's teaching about war again reaches beyond the obvious: yes, war kills living bodies, and this is indeed to be lamented; but it also warps Nature, and the human place within it—and once that is lost, there can be no survivors.

War Is Evil

Weapons
are tools of destruction

avoided by followers of Tao.

The citizen favors the creative in time of peace;

the citizen favors the destructive in time of war.

Weapons
are tools of destruction

not used by people of dignity,

but when their use cannot be avoided,

the best policy is calm restraint.

There
is no beauty in victory.

Whoever calls it so delights in slaughter.

Whoever delights in slaughter is not fit to rule.

The magnificence of the army cannot make it an auspicious weapon. It is possible that even inanimate Nature detests it. Hence, one who possesses Tao has nothing to do with it.

The Master Thinker (the Sage) when at home honours the left. When leading troops he honours the right.

Soldiers are instruments of ill omen. They are not agents for a Master Thinker. Only when inevitable will he employ them. What he most prizes is quiet and peace He will not praise a victory. To do so would show delight in the slaughter of men. As for those who delight in the slaughter of men, the world is too small for the gratification of their desires.

When affairs are felicitous the left is honoured, but when they are inauspicious the right is honoured. The Second Officer is placed on the left, but the Commander-in-Chief is placed on the right. That is to say, his position is as if he were attending a funeral. The slayer of multitudes should bitterly weep and lament.

Having fought and won it is as if he were presiding at a funeral.

So far as arms are concerned, they are implements of ill-omen. They are not implements for the man of Tao.

The man of Tao when dwelling at home makes the left as the place of honour; and when using arms makes the right as the place of honour.

He uses them only when he cannot avoid it.

In his conquests he takes no delight. If he take delight in them, it would mean that he enjoys in the slaughter of men. He who takes delight in the slaughter of men cannot have his will done in the world.

Military Strategies as Guides

In general, splendid martial force

is an inauspicious artifact.

Among natural kinds some eschew them.

Hence some guides don't place them.

If the 'superior gentleman' is in place then we value the left.

If we use martial force then we value the right.

Martial force

is an inauspicious artifact.

It is not an artifact of the 'superior gentleman.'

When you have no choice and use it,

deem detachment the better attitude.

When victorious don't treat it as glorious.

Those who glorify it--

that is to take satisfaction in killing.

If you take satisfaction in killing,

you cannot take that as filling the intent of the social world.

Auspicious affairs favor the left,

inauspicious the right.

The lower-rank general is on the left

and the higher rank on the right.

These words amount to arranging them according to the funeral rite.

Killing peoples in crowds,

we cry for them in bitter grief.

With victory in war we arrange things according to the funeral rite.

Arms are implements of ill omen which are abhorred by men.

Therefore, the man of Tao does not abide them.

Arms are implements of ill omen.

One uses them only when one cannot avoid it.

Even if one engages in fighting, one should remain quiescent and indifferent.

Even if the war is won, one should not glorify it.

To glorify it means that one enjoys slaying men.

If one enjoys slaying men, one will never be successful in the world.

Weapons are cursed instruments.

They are something to hate.

Therefore he who holds the Tao will not use them.

A virtuous man keeps to the left position in his daily life, but values the right in times of war.

Weapons are cursed instruments and not made for virtuous men.

He who uses them against his will will handle them with great concern.

One should regard victory as something ugly.

He who regards it as beautiful enjoys killing and will not achieve his ambition under Heaven.

A lucky event is honoured by the left position,

an unlucky event by the right.

In preparation for war, a lieutenant stands on the left,

a general stands on the right.

This means that the matter is treated as a funeral.

Cry with sorrow when many people are killed.

Regard it as a period of mourning when the battle is won.

Weapons are inauspicious instruments

Which people all loathe.

Therefore, he who possesses the Tao

Does not accumulate.

The gentleman ordinarily honors the left;

At war, he honors the right.

Therefore, weapons are not the gentleman's instruments.

Weapons being inauspicious instruments,

If you cannot but use them,

It is best to cover up their sharp blades;

Do not relish them.

If you relish them,

It means you enjoy killing men.

He who enjoys killing men

Cannot be allowed to prevail in the empire.

Hence, on auspicious occasions,

Precedence is given to the left;

In mourning,

Precedence is given to the right.

Hence, a lieutenant general stands left;

A senior general stands right,

Meaning it is handled with mourning rituals.

If the number of men killed is multitudinous,

Preside over it in grief.

After winning a war,

Handle it with mourning rituals.

As far as weapons are concerned, they are instruments of suffering.

They are not the instruments of the man of Tao.

For the actions of weapons will be repaid:

In a place where armies are stationed, only thorns and thistles grow.

Years of misery always accompany great wars.

When the man of Tao stays at home,

His left is his place of honor,

And when using weapons,

His right is his place of honor.

He uses weapons

Only when he cannot avoid doing so.

He does not rejoice in his conquests.

If he rejoices in his conquests,

It means that he enjoys killing and slaughter.

The person who enjoys killing people,

Cannot realize his aspirations in the world.

In matters of bringing honor, the place of honor is on the left;

In the opposite matters, the place of honor is on the right.

The adjutant-general takes his place on the left,

The general's place is on the right,

And this means that it is a funeral procession.

The slaughter of many people leads to deep and protracted mourning.

Victory in battle is immortalized in a funeral procession.

It is because arms are instruments of ill omen and there are Things that detest
them that the one who has the way does not abide by their use.

The gentleman gives precedence to the left when at home, but to the right when
he goes to war.

Arms are instruments of ill omen, not the instruments of the gentleman.

When one is compelled to use them, it is best to do so without relish.

There is no glory in victory, and so to glorify it despite this is to exult
in the killing of men.

One who exults in the killing of men will never have his way in the empire.

On occasions of rejoicing precedence is given to the left;

On occasions of mourning precedence is given to the right.

A lieutenants place is on the left;

The general's place is on the right.

This means that it is mourning rites that are observed.

When great numbers of people are killed, one should weep over them with sorrow.

When victorious in war, one should observe the rites of mourning.

Quelling War

Even victorious arms are unblest among tools, and people had better shun them. Therefore he who has Reason does not rely on them.

The superior man when residing at home honors the left. When using arms, he honors the right.

Arms are unblest among tools and not the superior man's tools. Only when it is unavoidable he uses them. Peace and quietude he holdeth high.

He conquers but rejoices not. Rejoicing at a conquest means to enjoy the slaughter of men. He who enjoys the slaughter of men will most assuredly not obtain his will in the empire.

Weapons generate fear; real humans loath them. Peace is the highest value. If it has been destroyed, utmost restraint is needed to restore it. Your enemies are people as well, so any battle is entered into gravely. Do not wish them personal harm. Do not rejoice in victory. Who would rejoice in the killing of men? Conduct a war as you would a funeral, it is a time of mourning. Weep for your enemy as you would for your friend.

Weaponry are not instruments of the good;

they are disliked by everyone.

One with Direction does not harbor them.

A gentleman,

at home, takes the left position;

in war, the right position.

Weaponry are not instruments of the good;

they are not a gentleman's instruments.

Use them only because there is no alternative;

use them with restraint.

After victory, beautify it not.

One who beautifies [war] is one who delights in killing.

One who delights in killing is unfit to be entrusted with people of the world.

On celebratory occasions, prefer left;

On sad occasions, prefer right.

The adjutant stays left;

the commander-in-chief stays right.

Thus, treat war as funeral.

Those who have killed, return with remorse.

Treat victory as funeral.

Auspicious weapons are the tools of misfortune.

Things may not all despise such tools,

but a master of the Way stays clear of them.

The noble-minded treasure the left when home and the right when taking up weapons of war.

Weapons are tools of misfortune,

not tools of the noble-minded.

When there's no other way,

they take up weapons with tranquil calm,

finding no glory in victory.

To find glory in victory is to savor killing people,

and if you savor killing people you'll never guide all beneath heaven.

We honor the left in celebrations

and honor the right in lamentations,

so captains stand on the left

and generals on the right.

But use them both as if conducting a funeral:

when so many people are being killed

it should be done with tears and mourning.

And victory too should be conducted like a funeral.

Weapons are tools of bad omen, everyone dislikes them,

Thus the follower of Tao keeps away from them.

A statesman normally honours his left;

But in war, he honours his right.

Weapons are tools of bad omen, and of no use to a statesman.

If forced to use them, it is best for him to be calm and restrained.

Glorify not the victory of war.

One who does, must be happy to kill!

He who is happy to kill must not succeed in the world.

Auspicious occasions honour the left,

Evil occasions honour the right.

When the deputy general stays on the left,

While the full general stays on the right,

Declare that a funeral ceremony is taking place.

Since so many people are slaughtered,

Let us weep with deep sorrow and grief, and

Treat a victory celebration as a funeral ceremony.

In
the end those with fine strategies lack the tools of fortune

They have things which are somehow disliked

So those who are present with tao are not dwelling in them.

The
master-child resides in and comes to treasure the left

Using strategy, come to treasure the right

Those with strategy lack the tools of fortune

They have not the tools of the master-child

When using them in the absence of a foreseeable need

Uncaring, indifferent actions are better.

Conquer
yet without embellishing

Yet those who are embellishing justify joy in slaughtering
men

In the end those who are joyful in slaughtering men

Cannot come to achieve their aspired relation with the world.

The best weapons are ill-omened instruments that all beings hold in fear. Therefore those who conform themselves to the Principle do not use them.

In times of peace, the prince puts the civil minister he honours on his left (the place of honour); but even in times of war, he puts the military commander on his right (which is not the place of honour, even though he is exercising his function).

Weapons are disastrous instruments. A wise prince uses them only with reluctance and from necessity. He prefers always a modest peace to a glorious victory.

No one should think that victory is a good thing. He who thinks that, shows that he has the heart of an assassin. Such a man would not be fit to reign over the empire.

According to the rites, those of good omen are placed on the left, those of ill-omen on the right. (Now when the emperor receives two military officers together), the one of subordinate rank (who only acts on superior orders, and is therefore less ill-omened) is placed on the left. The commanding officer is placed on the right, that is, in the first place according to the funeral rites, (the place of the chief mourner).

For it behooves one who has killed many men to weep tears of lamentation for them. The only place really fitting for a conquering general is that of the chief mourner (leading the mourning for those whose death he has caused).

When, in the beginning, in this visible world, the Principle imparted itself in the production of (sentient) beings with names, it did not produce them in a way that exhausted itself (but only as tenuous prolongations, its mass remaining intact).

A strong military, a tool of misfortune

All things detest it

Therefore, those who possess the Tao avoid it

Honorable gentlemen, while at home, value the left

When deploying the military, value the right

The military is a tool of misfortune

Not the tool of honorable gentlemen

When using it out of necessity

Calm detachment should be above all

Victorious but without glory

Those who glorify

Are delighting in the killing

Those who delight in killing

Cannot achieve their ambitions upon the world

Auspicious events favor the left

Inauspicious events favor the right

The lieutenant general is positioned to the left

The major general is positioned to the right

We say that they are treated as if in a funeral

The multitude who have been killed

Should be mourned with sadness

Victory in war should be treated as a funeral

Strong military power isn't something to be glorified. We should recognize it as an inauspicious instrument, the use of which inevitably brings misfortunes and calamities.

Violence and aggression are inextricably associated with the military. Thus, it is universally seen as extremely negative. Recognizing this, those who are on the path of Tao distance themselves from it.

During peacetime, honorable individuals value the left in day-to-day living. The left in this case symbolizes harmony.

During wartime, honorable individuals value the right in the utilization of the military. The right in this case symbolizes force.

Because the military is an ominous instrument of destruction, honorable individuals cannot see it as a tool that they identify with. It is the last resort, to be used only when absolutely necessary, when there is no other choice.

When forced to use the military, honorable individuals will do so with calmness above all, and detachment from emotional turmoil. They do not fight out of anger or hatred, and when they achieve victory, they do not consider it glorious. To them, there can be no possible glory in taking lives.

Those who do glorify war tend to be the ones who take delight in killing. Such people may think they have what it takes to conquer the world, but history shows they invariably fail to achieve their ambitions. They may dominate by force but never win the people's hearts.

Auspicious events favor the left (symbolizing harmony) while inauspicious events favor the right (symbolizing force). Thus, the lieutenant general, responsible for the peacetime training of the military organization, is situated to the left of the emperor. The major general, responsible for leading attacks, is stationed to the right.

Because of their involvement with the military, both generals are regarded by Tao cultivators as if they are fixtures in a funeral.

Because many lives are inevitably lost in battle, we understand the grief of those who mourn the dead, no matter which side they belong to.

The military parade that follows victory may just as well be a funeral procession, no matter which side happens to be the victor.

AVOIDING WAR

Even successful arms, among all implements, are unblessed. All men come to detest them. Therefore the one who follows Tao does not rely on them. Arms are of all tools unblessed, they are not the implements of a wise man. Only as a last resort does he use them.

Peace and quietude are esteemed by the wise man, and even when victorious he does not rejoice, because rejoicing over a victory is the same as rejoicing over the killing of men. If he rejoices over killing men, do you think he will ever really master the Empire?

In propitious affairs the place of honor is the left, but in unpropitious affairs we honor the right.

The strong man while at home esteems the left as the place of honor, but when armed for war it is as though he esteems the right hand, the place of less honor.

Thus a funeral ceremony is so arranged. The place of a subordinate army officer is also on the left and the place of his superior officer is on the right. The killing of men fills multitudes with sorrow; we lament with tears because of it, and rightly honor the victor as if he was attending a funeral ceremony.

Military weapons are implements (ch'i) of ill omen,

Avoided (o) even by natural creatures (wu).

Hence the Taoist does not indulge (ch'u) in them.

The princely person (chün-tzu) in dwelling honors the left,

In military campaigns honors the right.

Hence military weapons are not implements of a princely person.

Military weapons, being implements of ill omen,

Are to be employed only in dire necessity.

Better to regard them with lack of interest.

Do not admire (mei) them.

If one admires (mei) them,

One would be rejoicing in the killing of people.

But whoever rejoices in the killing of people,

Will not be successful (chih) in the world.

Therefore in joyful affairs the left is honored,

In mournful affairs the right is honored.

The Second-in-Command takes the place of the left,

The Commander-in-Chief takes the place of the right,

Meaning that this is his place in the funeral rite.

When many people have been killed,

Wail them with sorrow and lamentations.

When victorious in battle,

Mark the occasion with the rite (li) of funeral.

War Is Evil

Weapons are tools of destruction avoided by followers of Tao. The citizen favors the creative in time of peace; the citizen favors the destructive in time of war.

Weapons are the tools of destruction not used by people of dignity, but when their use cannot be avoided, the best policy is calm restaint.

There is no beauty in victory. Whoever calls it so delights in slaughter. Whoever delights in slaughter is not fit to rule.

Weapons generate fear; all creatures hate them.

Therefore, the Tao–Master tries not to use them . . . .

He uses them only when there is no alternative,

and then without joy, in a calm and restrained way.

Enjoy weapons, enjoy killing.

Enjoy killing, lose yourself . . . .

The killing of many people should create sorrow and grief.

A great victory is a funeral ceremony.

Thirty-one

Good weapons are instruments of fear; all creatures hate them.

Therefore followers of Tao never use them.

The wise man prefers the left.

The man of war prefers the right.

Weapons are instruments of fear; they are not a wise man's tools.

He uses them only when he has no choice.

Peace and quiet are dear to his heart,

And victory no cause for rejoicing.

If you rejoice in victory, then you delight in killing;

If you delight in killing, you cannot fulfill yourself.

On
happy occasions precedence is given to the left,

On sad occasions to the right.

In the army the general stands on the left,

The commander-in-chief on the right.

This means that war is conducted like a funeral.

When many people are being killed,

They should be mourned in heartfelt sorrow.

That is why a victory must be observed like a funeral.

Arms are tools of ill omen,

Detested by everybody.

And a man of the Tao does not use them.

The gentleman usually favours the left,

But when being at war, he favours the right.

Arms are tools of ill omen,

Not the instruments of the gentleman.

Even if compelled to use them,

The gentleman does not use them with pleasure.

Even if being the victor,

The gentleman does not glorify the victory.

He who glorifies the victory

Is such one as takes delight in killing.

He who takes delight in killing

Can never be successful in winning the empire.

On occasions of auspicious celebration the left is favoured;

On occasions of mourning the right is favoured.

A lieutenant's position is on the left;

A general's position is on the right.

That is to say, mourning rites should be observed in military operations.

War brings about heavy casualties,

So one should take part in it with deep sorrow.

When winning the victory, victors should treat the dead by observing the rites of mourning.

Dazzling arms

Are instruments of ill omen.

All creatures detest them.

Therefore the man of Tao does not keep company with them.

At home, the prince honors the left;

At war, the right.

Arms

Are instruments of ill omen -

No instruments for the prince.

When necessary to use them,

It's best to do so in calm disinterestedness.

You do not celebrate a victory.

To celebrate a victory

Is to delight in the slaughter of people.

He who delights in the slaughter of people

Will never realize his ambition under Heaven.

At times of good fortune, you honor the left;

At times of misfortune, you honor the right.

The second in command stands on the left;

The supreme commander stands on the right.

This means they stand as if observing funeral rites.

Having committed mass killings,

Let us weep with deep sorrow;

For a victory, let us observe funeral rites.

Sharp weapons are inauspicious instruments.

Everyone dislikes them.

Hence, those who follow the way of Dao avoid using them.

In times of peace, a person of virtue favours the left side.

Only during war does the right side become the preferred choice.

A weapon is an instrument of bad omen.

It is never the favourite object of the man of virtue.

Even as the last resort when military force has to be used,

It should be used with great restraint and equanimity.

In victory, one should not glorify the war.

He who glorifies war must be a bloodthirsty person.

No bloodthirsty person has ever won universal respect or approval.

The left side represents good auspices.

The right side augurs bad omen.

The second-in-command resides on the left side, whereas the commander-in-chief resides on the right.

In conducting the war, the mood is as dark and solemn as that of a funeral rite.

During the conflict, you should still mourn for the heavy casualties you have inflicted.

In victory, you should bury the dead with appropriate ceremony.

Banning the Use of Force

Yen Wu

Fine weapons are inauspicious instruments.

They are probably detested by the people.

Therefore, he who is possessed of Tao rejects them.

The superior man honors the left in time of peace;

In time of war he honors the right.

Weapons are inauspicious instruments;

They are not instruments for the superior man.

He uses them only under dire necessity,

And in this case priority is given to moderation.

He does not consider victory a fine thing.

Those who consider victory a fine thing

Are those who delight in slaughtering people.

Those who delight in slaughtering people

Can never gratify their ambition to win the world.

Therefore, the left is favored for felicitous occasions;

For mournful occasions, the right is favored.

The second-in-command stands on the left,

While the commander-in-chief stands on the right;

For according to funeral rites are they treated.

Mass slaughter is to be bewailed with grief and sorrow.

Victory is to be mourned with funeral rites.

Weapons, however handsome, are none the less implements of evit portent, distrusted by all.

The man of Tao keeps them at a distance.

The man of breding, at home and at peace, esteems the left-hand place the place of honour.

But in war-time, when arms are used, things are reversed, and the right-hand becomes the place of honour.

Weapons are of il-omen, avoided by the wise man, who resorts to them only if he must.

To him, quiet and peace are his chief delight.

He takes no delight in conquest.

To delight in conquest is to delight in slaughter.

He who delights in slaughter cannot hope to work his will in the world.

Fine weapons are tools of ill fortune;

All things seem to hate them.

Whoever has Tao does not depend on them.

At home a gentleman favors the left;

In war he favors the right.

Since weapons are tools of ill fortune,

They are not the tools for a gentleman,

Who uses them only from necessity.

Peace and quiet he upholds;

Victory he does not enjoy.

To enjoy victory is to like slaughter.

Whoever likes it

Cannot thrive beneath heaven.

Things of good omen favor the left;

Things of ill omen favor the right.

The under-general stands to the left;

The top-general stands to the right:

The way to stand at a burial rite.

Killing multitudes brings weeping and sorrow;

Treat victory like a funeral.

Weapons are instruments of killing and destruction,

which are contrary to the nature of life.

Thus, they are avoided by those who follow the subtle Way of the universe.

According to ancient social custom,

in times of peace a gentleman regards the left side, the soft hand, as the place of honor;

in times of war, the right side, the strong hand, is considered the place of honor.

Because weapons are inauspicious,

they are not the instruments of a gentleman.

Only when one has no other choice may one resort to using them, and, if their use is necessary, one must employ calmness and restraint,

for peace and quiet are the normal nature of universal life.

Even in victory there is no cause for excitement and rejoicing.

To rejoice over a victory is to delight in killing and destruction.

He who delights in killing and destruction cannot be expected to thrive for long in the world.

Therefore, on happy occasions the left side has precedence,

while on sad occasions, it is the right side.

When this rite was applied in the army, the lieutenant-commander stood at the left, while the commander-in-chief stood on the right.

This indicates that war is treated as the equivalent of a funeral service.

Because many people have been caused an unnatural death in war,

it is only right that the survivors should mourn them.

Even when a victory is won,

the occasion should be regarded as lamentable.

XXXI.

Ceasing
from War

Warlike
arms, however fine, are not the tools of joy,

But
of hateful omen to humanity,

Which
those who have the Tao will not employ with willingness,

Nor
linger where they ever chance to be.

Superior
men, at home, deem the honorable place

To be
the left hand, but in time of strife

The
men who go to war esteem the right to be the best,

For
with it they handle sword, and spear, and knife.

They
are tools of evil omen, not for the superior man,

Who
will only keep and use them when
he
must,

For
peace and quietude are what he prizes most,

And
victory is only good when just.

To
delight in victory is to delight in scenes of blood,

Where
myriads to sudden death are hurled,

And
the man who thus enjoys is never fit for power or place,

And
will fail to hold possession in the world.

In
prosperous affairs the left is honored most,

But
in matters of adversity the right,

So
the second in command of the army takes the left,

And
the opposite the one of greater might.

So
the order is, I say, just as at a funeral,

And
justly so, for who has thousands slain,

Should
weep for those who fell with the bitterness of grief,

As he
passes with his melancholy train.

The Master who is a Captain of soldiers

Does not give blessings with his weapons.

Soldiers' weapons are hated by most men,

Therefore he who has the Tao gives them no place.

In the dwelling of the man of peace the left side is the place of honour.

In soldiers' usage the right side is the place of honour.

A soldier does not give blessings with his weapons.

They are not the instruments of a man of peace.

A man of peace will not possess them, nor use them;

He gives the first place to calmness and repose.

If he conquers, he does not rejoice.

Without joy is he who wounds and kills men.

The Master who wounds and kills men

Cannot succeed in ruling his kingdom.

In time of joy, the left hand is preferred,

In time of mourning, the right hand is preferred.

In war, the second in command is placed on the left,

The first in command is placed on the right,

That is, he stands in the place of mourning.

He who has killed many men should weep with many tears.

He who has conquered in battle should stand in the place of mourning.

Soldiers
of war predict destruction.

And
are for use against Life.

A
person of Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

does
not set his heart upon them.( A person of Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

does
not build armies to fight and take control of others land.)

In
ordinary life, a gentle person regards

the
left side (omen of the future) as the place of honor:

In
war, the right side (omen of the past) is the place of honor.

As
soldiers are tools of destruction, They are not properly

a
gentle person's tools;

On
necessity will they will use them,

(having
them and knowing their use).

With
calm control.

Even
winning is

no
cause for rejoicing.

To
rejoice over a war won is

to
rejoice over the slaughter of humans!

So
a person who rejoices

over
the slaughter of humans

cannot
expect to do well

in
the world of humans.

On
happy occasions the left side (omen of the future) is preferred:

On
sad occasions the right side (omen of the past) .

In
the army, the Lieutenant Commander stands on the left,

While
the Commander-in-Chief stands on the right.

This
means that war is treated as equal to a funeral service (rememberance of the
past).

Because
many people have been killed,

it
is only correct that living should be sad at the loss of them.

Hence,
even in a victory is a funeral.

Truly, it is because arms are instruments of evil, which for ever are loathed by all beings, that one who has the Way has no concern with them.

At home a nobleman values the left as the place of honour, but when he bears arms, he values the right as the place of honour.

Arms are instruments of evil and not the instruments proper to a nobleman. Only when forced to do so he bears them, and peace and quiet he sets above all. Even when he conquers, he finds no beauty in it. Should he find beauty in it, he would take pleasure in the slaughter of men. He who takes pleasure in the slaughter of men, will never get his will in All-under-heaven.

On joyful occasions the left is valued as the place of honour; on sad occasions the right is valued. The second-in-command is posted on the left, the commander-in-chief is posted on the right, which means that they are placed in accordance with the mourning rites. The slaughter of multitude of men is bewailed with sorrow and lamentation. Therefore, upon a victory in war, they are placed in accordance with the mourning rites.

Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen,

hateful, it may be said, to all creatures. Therefore they who have

the Tao do not like to employ them.

The
superior man ordinarily considers the left hand the most

honourable place, but in time of war the right hand. Those sharp

weapons are instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the

superior man;--he uses them only on the compulsion of necessity. Calm

and repose are what he prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him

undesirable. To consider this desirable would be to delight in the

slaughter of men; and he who delights in the slaughter of men cannot

get his will in the kingdom.

On
occasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized

position; on occasions of mourning, the right hand. The second in

command of the army has his place on the left; the general commanding

in chief has his on the right;--his place, that is, is assigned to him

as in the rites of mourning. He who has killed multitudes of men

should weep for them with the bitterest grief; and the victor in

battle has his place (rightly) according to those rites.

Now, weapons are instruments of ill omen; Divinity abhors them.

Therefore, one who abides in THOU does not abide weapons.
The
Superior Person, at home, honors the more powerful Left-side;

on the battlefield, the more gentle Right-side;
they
put Peace above all else,
and refuse to glorify weapons.
If one glorifies
weapons, this propagates killing.
One
who delights in killing people has no influence with Heaven.
On
occasions of celebration, one honors the Left-side;
on occasions of grief,
the Right-side is honored more.
A Deputy General stands on the Left side;

their Commander stands at the Right..
in other words, they stand in
the order of their gravity of offense.
The
killing of masses of people we ought bewail with sorrow and grief.
Victory
in battle we ought commemorate with mournful rites.

Weapons
lead to violence

Which everyone despises

Avoid them altogether

Allow no compromises

If
use of weapons has to be

When enemies just leave no choice

Use them but reluctantly

In victory do not rejoice

Ascendancy
brings sorrow

And triumph doesn't carry pleasure

It severs you from wholeness

And robs you of your real treasure

Victory
is like a funeral

Where loss of life must make you sad

For putting other people down

Never ought to make you glad

FINE weapons of war augur evil.

Even things seem to hate them.

Therefore, a man of Tao does not set his heart upon them.

In ordinary life, a gentleman regards the left side as the place of honour:

In war, the right side is the place of honour.

As weapons are instruments of evil,

They are not properly a gentleman's instruments;

Only on necessity will he resort to them.

For peace and quiet are dearest to his heart,

And to him even a victory is no cause for rejoicing.

To rejoice over a victory is to rejoice over the slaughter of men!

Hence a man who rejoices over the slaughter of men cannot expect to thrive in the world of men.

On happy occasions the left side is preferred:

On sad occasions the right side.

In the army, the Lieutenant Commander stands on the left,

While the Commander-in-Chief stands on the right.

This means that war is treated on a par with a funeral service.

Because many people have been killed, it is only right that survivors should mourn for them.

Hence, even a victory is a funeral.

Instruments of war, however splendidly built can cause destruction and horror.

They should be regarded as inauspicious instruments, the use of which should be avoided in all but the direst necessity, and utilized with the utmost restraint.

The King looks to His minister of Peace on His left, and leans to His General on His right.

On happy occasions the left is the prized position, in times of war the right is honored.

Peace and stillness are dear to the heart of the followers of Tao,

Therefore:

Do not rejoice in victory, for such is to delight in the slaughter of men.

Enter a battle gravely, for the dead come from the people, and deep and great will be their lamentation.

A battle should be regarded as the beginning of the funeral.

Weapons are the bearers of bad news;

all people should detest them.

The
wise man values the left side,

and in time of war he values the right.

Weapons are meant for destruction,

and thus are avoided by the wise.

Only as a last resort

will a wise person use a deadly weapon.

If peace is her true objective

how can she rejoice in the victory of war?

Those who rejoice in victory

delight in the slaughter of humanity.

Those who resort to violence

will never bring peace to the world.

The left side is a place of honor on happy occasions.

The right side is reserved for mourning at a funeral.

When the lieutenants take the left side to prepare for war,

the general should be on the right side,

because he knows the outcome will be death.

The death of many should be greeted with great sorrow,

and the victory celebration should honor those who have died.

There are times when it seems as if one must intervene powerfully, suddenly, and even harshly. The wise leader does this only when all else fails.

As a rule, the leader feels more wholesome when the group process if flowing freely and unfolding naturally, when delicate facilitations far outnumber harsh interventions.

Harsh interventions are a warning that the leader may be uncentered or have an emotional attachment to whatever is happening. A special awareness is called for.

Even if harsh interventions succeed brilliantly, there is no cause for celebration. There has been injury. Someone's process has been violated.

Later on, the person whose process has been violated may well become less open and more defended. There will be a deeper resistance and possibly even resentment.

Making people do what you think they ought to be do does not lead toward clarity and consciousness. While the may do what you tell them to do at the time, they will cringe inwardly, grow confused, and plot revenge.

That is why your victory is actually a failure.

All weapons are bad news

And All creatures should detest them.

So those who follow the Tao do not keep them.

(Wise people prefer the left side as the place of honor,

But the genera always stands on the right.)

Weapons are the tools of fear.

They are not appropriate for a Sage

And should only be one's last resort.

Peace is always far superior.

There is no beauty in victory.

To find beauty in it would be to rejoice at killing people.

Anyone who delights in slaughter will never find satisfaction in this

world.

(When celebrating happy occasions, the left side is the place of honor,

But on unhappy occasions, the right is preferred.

Then we see those of lower rank standing on the left;

The Genera is given the right-hand position.)

Military officers should observe their duties gravely,

For when many people are killed

They should be mourned with great sorrow.

Celebrate your victory only with funera rites.

Weapons
of war are instruments of death.

All people fear them.

Therefore, all men of peace avoid them.

The
sage prefers Infinity.

The man of war prefers the earth.

Weapons
are instruments of death

and the tools of a warrior.

The sage avoids them at all cost;

and sometimes prefers death rather

than touching them.

Peace
and harmony are the sage's reality.

She considers victory to be the bastard

child of war.

If
you revel in victory,

then you sanction war and the killing of

human beings.

If you accept killing,

you have forgotten your oneness with all

beings.

In
time of celebration the left is the dominant

position;

In times of grief the right.

During wartime the general always stands on the

left

and the king on the right.

If
even one person is killed in war,

it is cause for great grief and mourning.

Victory is simply the maker of widows and orphans.

Now, a great army is not a measure of good fortune,

but rather a hateful thing, which a Taoist avoids.

It serves its Master only as an expensive aid.

Employ War only as a costly assistant.

War is not a measure of good fortune.

It is neither a measure of a Monarch's status, nor something he need employ.

Calm and mild is better.

Victory is not to be glorified, and whoever praises it is happy killing

people.

Alas, one who is happy killing people will not be remembered by the World.

Good Luck favors the left.

Bad Luck favors the right.

Stubbornly advancing troops serve the left.

Quickly advancing troops serve the right.

Speak of it as a sad ritual.

The slaughter of so many is a tragic sorrow.

Victory in battle is a sad ritual.

Fine weapons are the instruments of evil, hateful to all.

So those with Tao spurn them.

Men of peace favour the left;

Men of war favour the right.

Weapons are the tools of misfortune;

They are not the choice of the wise man,

Who uses them only when there is no other way;

And even then, he acts with calm restraint,

And victory is no occasion for rejoicing.

To rejoice in victory is to delight in killing.

Those who enjoy slaughter cannot find fulfilment in the world.

Auspicious occasions honour the left-hand place;

Inauspicious occasions honour the right-hand place.1

The second-in-command stands on the left,

Whilst the commander-in-chief stands on the right,

Arranged as they would be at rites of mourning.

When so many have been slaughtered,

Let us mourn with tears of sorrow,

And treat victory like a funeral.

1. The left-hand side is considered the honourable side, and the right-hand side is considered the less honour­able. (See Maurer 1986, 93)

The weapon is a disliked inauspicious object.

One who serves the Way will not take up a weapon.

A gentleman values the left in the dwelling place

And a general the right in the battlefield.

One serving the Way uses the inauspicious weapon

Only when there is the extreme necessity.

It is best to be indifferent to military achievements.

Having achieved a victory, one should not beautify it.

Those who beautify wars like killing.

Those who like killing cannot be accepted by the world.

The left is valued on auspicious occasions.

And the right on inauspicious occasions.

On the battle field, the assistant general is on the left.

And the general on the right.

Such positioning treats the war as a burial ceremony.

The wise person mourns when too many have died,

Holds a burial ceremony rather than victory celebration.

'Fine weapons' are ill-omened instruments. Things seem to detest them so the ambitious man does not dwell here.

"The gentleman at home favours the left when at war he favours the right."

Weapons are ill-omened instruments not instruments for the gentleman he uses them when he has no choice. What is calm and quiet is highest.

When victorious, he does not think this a fine thing because to think it fine is to delight in slaughtering people. One who delights in slaughtering people cannot achieve his purposes in the world.

"In fortunate times, prefer the left in mourning, prefer the right." The lower officer takes his stand on the left the higher officer takes his stand on the right. This says: He takes his stand as at a mourning ceremony.

At the slaughter of such masses of men, he weeps for them, mourning and lamenting. When victorious in the battle - he takes his stand as at a mourning ceremony.

When you begin making decisions and cutting it up, rules and names appear. And once names appear; you should know to stop. Knowing to stop, you can be without fear.

Weapon is a means that cause affliction; it should be discarded.

Therefore, he who follows Tao does not use weapon.

A good leader is yielding. He uses power only for defense. He exerts every effort to maintain peace.

To glorify oneself with military victory means to rejoice at killing of people. Is it right to respect him who is glad about killing?

Respect leads to wellbeing. Wellbeing contributes to the creative process.

Violence leads to afflictions.

If many people are killed, it is grievous. The victory has to be 'celebrated' with funeral ceremony.

Weapons bring misfortune.

Somebody on the Tao Way will detest them.

He doesn't use them but forced to defend.

Even so, he is restrained.

A
Wise Leader when winning is not happy about his victory.

He is not happy about killing people.

In battle he is sad of doing it,

Because a victory is not a time to celebrate, but for funerals.

He who is happy in killing and crimes,

Is not on the Tao Way.

Excellent
weapons are inauspicious instruments. Creatures always abhor them. So those
who have the Dao do not become involved with them. When the ruler resides at
peace he values the left, and when he takes up arms he values the right. Arms
are inauspicious instruments, not the instruments fit for a noble man. Only
when there is no alternative does he resort to them. [And then] placidity and
blandness are the best. He does not regard victory as glorious. Those who glorify
victory exult in killing people. Now those who exult in killing people cannot
achieve their aspirations in this world. For auspicious affairs one elevates
the left. For inauspicious affairs one elevates the right. The lieutenant generals
take their stations on the left. The full generals reside on the right. [Because
the right is the side of mourning, the above discussion] means one ought to
treat [military] affairs with the rites of mourning. Because of the large numbers
of people who are killed, they are to be wept for with sorrow. Victory in war
should be treated with the rites of mourning.

Fine weapons are the tools of evil;

All things are likely to hate them.

So those with Tao do not want to deal with them.

The gentleman who stays at home values the left;

In war, he values the right.

Weapons are the tools of evil,

not the tools of the gentleman.

When he uses them unavoidably, he is most calm and detached

And does not glorify his victory.

To glorify means to relish the murder of people,

Relishing the murder of people,

One cannot exercise his will in the world.

Happy occasions prefer the left.

Sorrowful occasions prefer the right.

The lieutenant-general is placed on the left.

The general-in-chief is placed on the right.

This means observing this occasion with funeral rites.

Having killed many people, one should lament with sorrow and grief.

Victory in war must be observed with funeral rites.

The Use of Force

The finest weapons can be the instruments of misfortune,

And thus contrary to Natural Law.

Those who possess teh Tao turn away from them.

Evolved leaders occupy and honor the left;

Those who use weapons honor the right.

Weapons are instruments of misfortune

That are used by the unevolved.

When their use is unavoidable,

The superior act with calm restraint.

Even when victorious, let there be no joy,

For such joy leads to contentment with slaughter.

Those who are content with slaughter

Cannot find fulfillment in the world.

Value peace above all. Opposing armies are filled with your children and your elders. Violence is to be detested.

Weapons at best are tools of bad omen,

Loathed and avoided by those of the Way.

In
the usage of men of good breeding,

Honor is had at the left;

Good omens belong on the left

Bad omens belong on the right;

And warriors press to the right!

When the general stands at the right

His lieutenant is placed at the left.

So the usage of men of great power

Follows that of the funeral rite.

Weapons
are tools of bad omen,

By gentlemen not to be used;

But when it cannot be avoided,

They use them with calm and restraint.

Even in victory's hour

These tools are unlovely to see;

For those who admire them truly

Are men who in murder delight.

As
for those who delight to do murder,

It is certain they never can get

From the world what they sought when ambition

Urged them to power and rule.

A
multitude slain!- and their death

Is a matter for grief and for tears;

The victory after a conflict

Is a theme for a funeral rite.

Weapons are instruments of evil,

They are disdained by everyone.

Therefore those who possess Tao stay away from them.

When at home jun-zi honours the left;

When at war he honours the right.

Weapons are the instruments of evil, not the instruments of jun-zi.

When he uses them unavoidably, he maintains an indifferent attitude.

Even when he is victorious, he doesn't think himself praiseworthy.

If he praises his victory, he is a man delighting in the slaughter of people.

He who delights in the slaughter of people will not succeed under Heaven.

On happy occasions, the left is honoured.

On unhappy occasions, the right is honoured.

The lieutenant-general stands on the left,

The senior general stands on the right.

That is to say that the arrangement of war affairs follows that of funeral ceremonies.

The war will slaughter the multitude of people.

So we should go to the battleground with sorrow and grief.

Even if it is won, we observe the occasion with funeral ceremonies.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen.

The people always hate them, so one who has the Dao has nothing to do with them.

When the noble man is at home, he honors the left and, when employing troops, honors the right.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen;

they are not the instruments of the noble man, who uses them only when there is no choice.

It is best to be utterly dispassionate [tiandan] about them, and, even if they bring victory, one should not praise them.

Nevertheless, to praise them means that one delights in slaughtering people, and one who delights in slaughtering people, of course, can never achieve the goal of ruling all under Heaven.

For auspicious matters, one honors the left, and, for inauspicious matters, one honors the right.

A deputy general takes his place on the left, but a general-in-chief takes his place on the right, where mourning rites are observed.

When masses of people are slaughtered, one should weep for them with utmost sadness, so, when victorious in war, one should observe it with mourning rites.

1. As for weapons—they are instruments of ill omen.

2. And among things there are those that hate them.

3. Therefore, the one who has the Way, with them does not dwell.

4. When the gentleman is at home, he honors the left;

5. When at war, he honors the right.

6. Therefore, weapons are not the instrument of the gentleman—

7. Weapons are instruments of ill omen.

8. When you have no choice but to use them, it's best to remain tranquil and
calm.

9. You should never look upon them as things of beauty.

10. If you see them as beautiful things—this is to delight in the killing of
men.

11. And when you delight in the killing of men, you'll not realize your goal
in the land.

12.
Therefore, in happy events we honor the left,

13. But in mourning we honor the right.

14. Therefore, the lieutenant general stands on the left;

15. And the supreme general stands on the right.

16. Which is to say, they arrange themselves as they would at a funeral.

17. When multitudes of people are killed, we stand before them in sorrow and
grief.

18. When we're victorious in battle, we treat the occasion like a funeral ceremony.

Weapons are
terrible things.

If you want to get right with Tao, reject weapons.

The Master,
knowing that all things came from Tao,

recognizes what he has in common with his enemies.

But when there is no other choice, he uses force reluctantly.

He does so with great restraint,

and never celebrates a victory;

to do so would be to rejoice in killing.

A person who would rejoice in killing

has lost touch completely with Tao.

When you win
a war, you preside over a funeral.

Pay your respects to the dead.

.

War and Peace

Weapons are tools of destruction hated by people.

Therefore followers of the Way never use them.

In peace leaders favor the creative left.

In war they favor the destructive right.

Weapons are tools of destruction,

not used by good leaders.

When their use cannot be avoided,

the best policy is calm restraint.

Even in victory there is no glory.

Those who celebrate victory delight in slaughter.

Those who delight in slaughter

will not be successful leaders.

The killing of many should be mourned with sorrow.

A victory should be celebrated with funeral ceremonies.

Weapons cause pain.

The Sage is against violence

The Tao-filled man has no need of it.

One who lives in peace goes the way of the blessed.

One who takes up arms follows the path of the cursed.

Weapons bring disaster.

The Sage detests them.

How can a victory gladden which brings sorrow and death to others?

Injuring others means losing Tao.

One who follows wisdom goes the way of life and light.

One who chooses arms does the way of death pursued by curse and darkness despair and destruction.

The Unlucky Emblem

Lao Tze says,

The strong military force is an unlucky emblem to the state, thus all living creatures would abhor it.

The Tao practicians should not promote it too.

The upright man ordinarily considers the left hand the most honorable place, but in time of war the right hand.

The military force is an unlucky emblem, it is not the emblem for the upright man.

It is manipulated on the compulsion of necessity.

Calm and repose should be prized;

victory is not regarded as a beautiful work.

Whoever regards victory as a beautiful work, he is one who takes delight in killing men.

Whoever likes to kill men will not succeed in his ambition to rule the world.

On occasion of rejoicing, precedence is given to the left;

on occasion of mourning, precedence is given to the right.

The second in command of an army has his place on the left;

the chief commander has position of the right;

this says: a funeral is taking place.

The lamentation is observed for the numerous dead who were killed on the battlefield.

Thus, a victory ceremony is being held in the funeral rite.

MAINTAINING PEACE

Weapons
of war are instruments of fear,

and are abhorred by those who follow the Tao.

The leader who follows the natural way

does not abide them.

The
warrior king leans to his right,

from whence there comes his generals' advice,

but the peaceful king looks to his left,

where sits his counsellor of peace.

When he looks to his left, it is a time of peace,

and when to the right, a time for sorrow.

Weapons
of war are instruments of fear,

and are not favoured by the wise,

who use them only when there is no choice,

for peace and stillness are dear to their hearts,

and victory causes them no rejoicing.

To
rejoice in victory is to delight in killing;

to delight in killing is to have no self-being.

The
conduct of war is that of a funeral;

when people are killed, it is a time of mourning.

This is why even victorious battle

should be observed without rejoicing.

Weapons are the tools of violence;

all decent men detest them.

Weapons are the tools of fear;

a decent man will avoid them

except in the direst necessity

and, if compelled, will use them

only with the utmost restraint.

Peace is his highest value.

If the peace has been shattered,

how can he be content?

His enemies are not demons,

but human beings like himself.

He doesn't wish them personal harm.

Nor does he rejoice in victory.

How could he rejoice in victory

and delight in the slaughter of men?

He enters a battle gravely,

with sorrow and with great compassion,

as if he were attending a funeral.

War is an unlucky instrument.

It is hated by everything!

Thus a man of Dao will never resort to use it.

A position taken by a gentle official is on the right - honorable side;

the position taken by a war conductor is on the left - less honorable side.

War is an unlucky instrument, it is not the instrument of a gentle ruler.

They are obligated to die and utilized by the authority.

To keep calm and have peace of mind is to be superior.

Victory of war is not delightful:

if one delights in war, he delights in killing people;

if one delights in killing people, it will never be possible for him to be at peace with the world.

Thus on happy occasions the right side is honored.

On sad occasions the left side is honored.

During a war, many people are killed,

It should be taken mournfully.

Even a victory should be treated as a funeral.

The army is the mechanism of bad luck.

The elements of the world may oppose.

So those who have ambitions cannot rest.

Therefore the nobleman takes his place on the left side,

And the commander on the right side.

So the army is not the nobleman's weapon.

As a mechanism of bad luck,

He uses it only as the last resort.

Then the best way is to use it quickly and destructively.

Do not enjoy this.

To take delight in it is to enjoy killing people.

Those who enjoy killing people do not attract the favor of the world.

The good inclines to the left,

The bad inclines to the right.

Thus the intelligent officer stays on the left,

The army commander stays on the right.

Speaking in an image of sadness,

After killing the people, every one stands in mourning.

Victory is celebrated as a funeral service.

XXXI

Weapons
are dangerous tools for all concerned

Natural creature do not use them

If
you must use them, don't let them take hold of your mind

At peace it is the earth that is important, the feminine principle

At war it is heaven, the essence of the male

Therefore weapons and war are not the tools of the taoist

If
you must use them remain calm and detached

Never look upon them as things of beauty

To do so would mean that you delight in the slaughter of men

You would never be able to lead the land properly

In
happy events we honor the richness of the earth

In sad ones we turn our eyes to heaven

Since every soldier's mind, and every general's, is on the weather

It is clearly an occasion of sadness

Whenever multitudes are killed, the taoist grieves

Victory or defeat, it's all a funeral to him

Fine Weapons

Fine weapons are implements of ill omen:

people may despise them,

so those with the Way do not dwell with them.

Therefore the place of honor for the cultured is on the left,

while the honored place for the martialist is on the right.

Weapons, being instruments of ill omen,

are not the tools of the cultured,

who use them only when unavoidable.

They consider it best to be aloof;

they win without beautifying it.

Those who beautify it

enjoy killing people.

Those who enjoy killing

cannot get their will of the world.

The left is favored for auspicious things,

the right for things of ill omen:

so the subordinate general is on the left,

the top general on the right.

That means when you are in ascendancy of power

you handle it as you would a mourning.

When you have killed many people,

you weep for them in sorrow.

When you win a war,

you celebrate by mourning.

Weapons are destructive.

They are generally disliked.

Therefore, Tao-followers avoid them.

At home, Gentlemen are happy in left seats.

When in war, gentlemen prefer to the right.

Since weapons are destructive, they are not gentlemen's tools.

They are used as a last resort.

It is better to be cautious.

After winning, one should not glorify the victory.

By glorifying war, one takes delight in killing.

Those who take delight in killing will not win the world.

In joyful events the left is honored.

In funerals the right side is honored.

The lieutenant commander positions to the left.

The command-in-chief positions to the right.

This is following funeral convention.

When casualties are heavy, honor the deaths with grief.

Treat victory as if it is a funeral.

Good weapons are instruments of evil.

Even things seem to hate them.

Therefore the man of the Way does not set his heart upon them.

A superior man prefers the left side when at home, prefers the right side when in war.

Weapons are instruments of evil.

They are not the instruments of the superior man.

He uses them when he has no choice.

He prefers peace and quiet.

To him victory is not beautiful.

To glorify a victory is to rejoice over killing men.

If one rejoices over killing men, one will not conquer the will of the world.

Many people have been killed, one should weep over them with sorrow.

A victory is also a funeral.

Good weapons, instruments of bad omen,

all creatures hate them,

followers of Tao never use them.

The wise man prefers the left.

The man of war prefers the right.

Weapons, instruments of bad omen,

not a wise mean's tools.

He uses them only when he has no choice.

Peace and quiet are great virtues,

victory causes no rejoicing.

Who rejoices in victory, delights killing.

Who delights killing, cannot come to power in the world.

Good omen prefers the left.

bed omen to the right.

The generals stand on the left,

The commander-in-chief on the right,

same as conducting a funeral.

Many people are killed,

should be mourned in heartfelt sorrow.

Victory ceremony must be like a funeral.

Weapons are ill-omened things.

Among
gentle people the left side

is the place of honor when at home,

but in war the right side is the place of honor.

Weapons
are not proper instruments for gentle people;

they use them only when they have no other choice.

Peace and quiet are what they value.

They do not glory in victory.

to glorify it is to delight in the slaughter of people.

Those who delight in the slaughter of people will

never thrive among all that dwell under heaven.

The
army that has killed people

should be received with sorrow.

Conquerors should be received with the rites of mourning.

Weapons,
whether

material, textual, verbal or rational,

are still instruments of fear and violence,

and at times even good people bear them.

Still, the atheist never considers them as proper tools.

To consider weapons adequate tools

means to use them

and to use them

means to hurt and destroy.

The person who enjoys hurting and destroying

will never learn the meaning of life or pleasure.

If
in winning, you hurt or destroy,

accept it without joy, as at a funeral

with grief and mourning.

Fine weapons are instruments of evil as soldiers can be: quite ill-omened things,
often hated.

Those with fine dao turn away from weapons that are most often hated.

The gentleman favours the left hand side among people in peace; peace people
are of good birth. In a fair peace the symbolic left is the place of honour.
Yes, a good ruler honours the left and its good omens when at home, but in war
this is reversed: On military occasions he favours the right side as the place
of war honour. And so he honours the right of bad omens.

The durable, even when he conquers, does hardly regard weapons as lovely things.
Weapons and soldiers can be bad and evil-doing tools. They're not often the
tools of the gentleman and good ruler.

To hold them dear means to delight in them, and so to delight in slaughter of
men.

And he who delights in the slaughter of men will never get what he looks for
out of those that live and function under heaven. In ugly victory there's no
beauty,

and who calls it handsome perhaps preaches slaughter.

Use of soldiers [and police] can't be helped, best policy is calm restraint.

Who delights in the slaughter of men wont succeed, wont succeed in ruling the
world; and slaying of multitudes should be mourned.

A host that has slain men had better be received with grief and mourning rites;
he that has conquered in battle had better be received and celebrated with some
mournful funeral custom.. A victory is the grand occasion for funerals.

Now,

Weapons are instruments of evil omen;

Creation abhors them.

Therefore,

One who aspires to the Way does not abide in them.

The superior man at home honors the left, on the battlefield honors the right.

Therefore,

Weapons are not instruments of the superior man;

Weapons are instruments of evil omen,

to be used only when there is no other choice.

He places placidity above all and refuses to prettify weapons;

If one prettifies weapons, this is to delight in the killing of others.

Now,

One who delights in the killing of others

Cannot exercise his will over all under heaven.

For this reason,

On occasions for celebration, the left is given priority;

On occasions for mourning, the right is given priority.

Therefore,

A deputy general stands on the left,

The general-in-chief stands on the right.

In other words,

They stand in accordance with mourning ritual.

The killing of masses of human beings,

we bewail with sorrow and grief;

Victory in battle,

we commemorate with mourning ritual.

Weapons, however ornamental, are not a source of happiness, but are dreaded by all.

Therefore the man of Tao will not abide where such things are.

A respectable man at home sets the place of honour at his left hand; but the warrior on going forth to battle gives honour to the right hand. For weapons are things of ill omen, and the man of enlightenment does not use them except when he cannot help it.

His great desire is peace, and he does not take joy in conquest.

To joy in conquest is to joy in the loss of human life.

He who joys in bloodshed is not fit to govern the country.

When affairs are prosperous the left side is preferred, but when things are adverse the right is esteemed.

The adjutant-general is therefore on the left side, while the general-in-chief is on the right.

This I perceive is the manner also observed at a funeral!

He who has occasion to kill many people has cause for deep sorrow and tears.

Therefore a victorious army observes the order of a funeral.

Discovery, or Defense?

Will the time ever come

when you must defend your views

or your feelings?

Could your beloved's own pain

ever cause an attack?

Be careful.

What manifests as an attack on you

is really a statement of fear.

If you attack in return

the fear escalates.

Defend yourself when necessary

with gentle confidence,

never with glee or satisfaction.

For when the battle is over

and you survey the damage done,

it will be a time for mourning.

Books on ''fighting fair"

give me pause.

Rather than finding better ways to fight,

might you be able to find

the roots of your conflicts?

This is certainly a difficult task,

filled with emotion and fear.

But if your goal is discovery

instead of defense,

deep peace is just ahead.

Fine weapons are instruments of evil. They are hated by men. Therefore those who possess Tao turn away from them.

The good ruler when at home honours the left. When at war he honours the right.

Weapons are instruments of evil, not the instruments of a good ruler.
When he uses them unavoidably, he regards calm restraint as the best
principle.

Even when he is victorious, he does not regard it as praiseworthy, For
to praise victory is to delight in the slaughter of men. He who
delights in the slaughter of men will not succeed in the empire.

In auspicious affairs, the left is honoured. In inauspicious affairs,
the right is honoured. The lieutenant general stands on the left. The
senior general stands on the right. This is to say that the arrangement
follows that of funeral ceremonies.

For the slaughter of the multitude, let us weep with sorrow and grief.
For a victory, let us observe the occasion with funeral ceremonies.

Even the finest
arms are an instrument of evil,

A spread of plague,

And the way for a vital man to go is not the way of a soldier.

But in time of war men civilized in peace

Turn from their higher to their lower nature.

Arms are an instrument of evil,

No measure for thoughtful men

Until there fail all other choice

But sad acceptance of it.

Triumph is not beautiful.

He who thinks triumph beautiful

Is one with a will to kill,

And one with a will to kill

Shall never prevail upon the world.

It is a good sign when man's higher nature comes forward,

A bad sign when his lower nature comes forward,

When retainers take charge

And the master stays back

As in the conduct of a funeral.

The death of a multitude is cause for mourning:

Conduct your triumph as a funeral.

Weapons are not auspicious, but very annoying.

So, people who follow the DAO do not use them.

Noble men value their left side in daily life and their right side in battle.

Weapons are not auspicious, not something noble men like to use.

They use them only when they have to, and they treat them like they do not matter.

After winning a war, do not be delighted.

Those who are delighted love to kill.

The people who love to kill cannot be allowed to control the country.

At celebrations, the left side is respected; at funerals, the right side is respected.

In a war, the subordinate is on the left side and the commander is on the right side.

Therefore, a war should be talked about like a funeral.

When many are killed, people should cry to show sadness.

Winning a war should be treated like a funeral.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen; all creatures abhor them.

Therefore, the man of the Tao never abides in them.

The virtuous man usually honors the left, the positive,

But, when called to be in a battlefield, honors the right, the negative.

Weapons are instruments of ill omen,

Not instruments of the virtuous man.

Therefore, when he is compelled to resort to them,

He uses them with utmost restraint and calmness.

He does not glorify victory, for glorifying victory means to take delight in killing.

And whosoever takes delight in killing will never find success in this world.

On occasions for celebration, the positive left is given priority,

On occasions for mourning, the negative right is given priority.

The lieutenant stands on the left, and the general on the right.

That is, they stand in accordance with mourning ritual.

The killing of masses of human beings we bewail with deep sorrow and grief.

The victory in battle we observe with rites of mourning.

The weapon is a disliked inauspicious object.

One who serves the Way will not take up a weapon.

A gentleman values the left in the dwelling place

And a general the right in the battlefield.

One serving the Way uses the inauspicious weapon

Only when there is the extreme necessity.

It is best to be indifferent to military achievements.

Having achieved a victory, one should not beautify it.

Those who beautify wars like killing.

Those who like killing cannot be accepted by the world.

The left is valued on auspicious occasions.

And the right on inauspicious occasions.

On the battle field, the assistant general is on the left.

And the general on the right.

Such positioning treats the war as a burial ceremony.

The wise person mourns when too many have died,

Holds a burial ceremony rather than victory celebration.

Instruments of war, however splendidly built can cause destruction and horror.

They should be regarded as inauspicious instruments,

the use of which should be avoided in all but the direst necessity, and utilized with the utmost restraint.

The King looks to His minister of Peace on His left, and leans to His General on His right.

On happy occasions the left is the prized position, in times of war the right is honored.

Peace and stillness are dear to the heart of the followers of Tao,

Therefore:

Do not rejoice in victory, for such is to delight in the slaughter of men.

Enter a battle gravely, for the dead come from the people, and deep and great will be their lamentation.

A battle should be regarded as the beginning of the funeral.

