===== Chapter 3 =====

Not to esteem the worthy

Causes the people not to contend.

Not to value goods that are hard to get

Causes the people not to do any stealing.

Not to see desirables

Causes the people's minds not to be confused.

Therefore, the governance of the sages:

Empties their minds

Makes true their insides

Weakens their determinations

Strengthens their bones

Always causing the people not to know

Not to desire

Causing the clever men not to dare to act!

By doing without "doing"

There is necessarily nothing not managed.

Don't glorify heroes, And people will not contend.

Don't treasure rare objects, And no one will steal.

Don't display what people desire, And their hearts will not be disturbed.

Therefore, the Sage rules By emptying hearts and filling bellies, By
weakening ambitions and strengthening bones; Leads people Away from
knowing and wanting;

Deters those who know too much From going too far:

Practices non-action And the natural order is not disrupted.

Do not glorify the skilled

And people won't wrangle.

Do not treasure rarities

And people won't steal.

Don't flaunt objects of desire

And people's hearts will not be disturbed.

When the sage rules,

He keeps people's minds blank and their stomachs full.

He weakens their ambitions but strengthens their bones.

He keeps people free from knowledge and desires

So the ones who do have knowledge are afraid to act.

If he acts without taking action

There is nothing that is not right.

WU-WEI

When neither the meritorious, worthy, gifted nor wise are exalted or rewarded,

Fighting, quarreling and contention become unnecessary.

When treasure, rare objects and belongings are not accumulated, valued and prized,

The rewards of thievery cease to have meaning.

When desirable things are not seen nor displayed,

The hearts of people are not troubled, excited or confused.

The Sage governs himself and leads others by:

- Encouraging the heart to be open and free from desire.

- Providing sustenance for the stomach.

- Calming the will to strive for the sake of striving.

- Strengthening the body.

Thus, keeping all, innocent and free of knowledge and desire,

The Sage discourages the cunning from harmful action.

Wu-Wei -

Action unforced -

Permitting all to just happen,

by itself,

without effort.

Do not exalt one whose virtue, talent, power, and action exceeds others, so people will not compete.

Do not prize difficult-to-obtain goods, so that people will not commit robbery.

Do not display deep-seated desires, so that people's minds are untroubled.

The sages' way of ruling is by:

- freeing the mind,

- reinforcing the soul,

- making gentle their ambitions,

- and strengthening their bones.

It is a constant that when the mind is free, people are free of deep seated desires.

The master knows this and does not presume to act!

Act without action (wu wei), then all is in order.

QUIETING FOLK

To reward merit is to stir up emulation; to prize rarities is to

encourage robbery; to display desirable things is to excite the disorder

of covetousness.

Therefore,
the sage governeth men by keeping their minds and their bodies

at rest, contenting the one by emptiness, the other by fullness. He

satisfieth their desires, thus fulfilling their wills, and making them

frictionless; and he maketh them strong in body, to a similar end.

He
delivereth them from the restlessness of knowledge and the cravings of

discontent. As to those who have knowledge already, he teacheth them the

way of non-action. This being assured, there is no disorder in the

world.

Not to give preference to the high and mighty will deter the envy ofthe people in order. To demonstrate no desire will give them peace in theirhearts. Therefore, when the Sage governs, he frees his people of passionatewishes and offers serenity to their souls. The Sage weakens greedy curiosityand strengthens the backbone of the upright. So does he master true serenityin good government.

When you praise people for their achievements, people will compete

When you call things valuable, people will steal

When people flaunt desirable things, it will make other people restless

Therefore the sage sets himself to the task of emptying their heads

To make sure they're not hungry, discourage their ambitions and strengthen their bodies

So people will be without anxiety and without the desire for knowledge

And the scientists will be played off the field

When people won't labour anymore

All will live in peace

If no distinctions of superiority and inferiority prevail among officers, they will devote themselves to their tasks rather than to rivalries with one another.

If no special value is placed upon rare things, one will have no incentive for stealing them.

If nothing appears to arouse envy, one will remain satisfied with things as they are

Since this is so, the wise administrator does not lead people to set their hearts upon what they cannot have, but satisfies their inner needs. He does not promote ambition to improve their status, but supports their self-sufficiency. He does not complicate their lives with knowledge of multifarious details or with an urge to attend to this, that and the other.

By keeping people contented, he prevents those who mistakenly believe that ambition is better than contentment from leading the contented astray.

By being calm and contented himself, he sets an example for his people.

If we stop looking for "persons of superior morality" (hsien) to put in power,

There will be no more jealousies among the people.

If we cease to set store by products that are hard to get,

There will be no more thieves.

If the people never see such things as excite desire,

Their hearts will remain placid and undisturbed.

Therefore the Sage rules

By emptying their hearts

And filling their hearts?

Weakening their intelligence

And toughening their sinews

Ever striving to make the people knowledgeless and desireless.

Indeed he sees to it that if there be any who have knowledge,

They dare not interfere.

Yet through his actionless activity all things are duly regulated.

Bestowing honor breeds ambitions.

Hoarding treasure invites thieves.

Displaying objects of desire sows the seeds of discontent.

Therefore the sage governs

by emptying minds and filling bellies,

by weakening wills and strengthening bones.

He extols the virtue of desireless unknowing

and keeps intellects off balance.

When not-doing is accomplished,

nothing remains undone.

Not exalting worthies

Keeps the people from rivalry

Not prizing goods which are hard to obtain

Keeps the people from acting like thieves

Not displaying the desirable

Keeps the peoples' hearts from confusion

This is how wise ones approach government

Emptying the hearts

(And) filling the bellies

Weakening the ambitions

(And) strengthening the bones

Always keeping the people free of sophistication, free of desires

So that even the clever ones will not presume to meddle at all

(Where) action does not take action

There nothing is out of order

Control

By not exalting the worthy,

you prevent people from competing.

By not valuing treasures,

You prevent people from acting like thieves.

By not displaying desirable things,

You prevent people from confusion of the heart.

Therefore the sage rules

by emptying their minds

and by stuffing their bellies,

by weakening their ambitions

and strengthening their bones.

He constantly causes the people

to be without knowledge and desire,

If he can bring about that clever people

will not try to interfere,

than there is nothing that wil not be in order.

When praise is lavished upon the famous, the people contend and compete with one another.

When exotic goods are traded and treasured, the compulsion to steal is felt.

When desires are constantly stimulated, people become disturbed and confused.

Therefore, the wise person sets an example by emptying her mind, opening her heart, relaxing her ambitions, relinquishing her desires, cultivating her character.

having conquered her own cunning and cravings, she can't be manipulated by anyone.

Do by not-doing. Act with non-action. Allow order to arise of itself.

If you create the great, and elevate it,

You will lose your self.

Become attached to your belongings

And you open the inner door to thieves.

Let the Sage guide you:

Clear out your inner space,

And your own truth will arise.

Wear down attachment and division

And you strengthen your will.

Be led to shed the crust of knowledge;

Cut through the cycle of want

And reject all that you have been told to know.

Follow the way of inner action:

In the course of disburdenment,

There is healing.

When you clutch something, you have already lost it. A thief can "read" attachment: he doesn't have to see what it is you are carrying to know it is valuable, because he can sense your anxiety about keeping it in your grasp. The irony that Lao Tzu is pointing out here is that attachment actually creates and perpetuates separation, because it attempts to override the natural synergy of attraction that exists between us and what is truly ours. Of course, Lao Tzu is not an ascetic or a minimalist: the disburdenment that he describes in the final stanza is the very inner act that brings us the gifts and possessions that truly belong to us, without the need for forced protection or urgent attachment. The inner cleansing he proposes to us is the process that prepares the ground for natural possession. This theme is also explored in the I Ching, in Hexagram 14, Possession in Great Measure.

Leaders Work Humbly

Leaders
should not seek power or status;

people will not then crave power or status.

If scarce goods are not valued highly,

people will have no need to steal them.

If there is nothing available to arouse passion,

people will remain content and satisfied.

The
truly wise do lead

by instilling humility and open-mindedness,

by providing for fair livelihoods,

by discouraging personal ambition,

by strengthening the bone-structure of the people.

The
wise avoid evil and radical reform;

thus the foolish do not obstruct them.

They work serenely, with inner quiet.

When worth is not honoured the people may be kept from strife.

When rare articles are not valued the people are kept from theft.

When the desirable is left unnoticed the heart is not confused.

Therefore, the method of government by the Holy Man is to empty the heart, while strengthening the purpose; to make the will pliant, and the character strong. He ever keeps the people simple-minded and passionless, so that the world-wise do not dare to plan.

Practice non-action and everything will be regulated.

Not exalting the worthy keeps the people from emulation.

Not valuing rare things keeps them from theft.

Not showing what is desirable keeps their hearts from confusion.

Therefore the Sage rules By emptying their hearts, Filling their stomachs, Weakening their ambitions And strengthening their bones.

He always keeps them from knowing what is evil and desiring what is good; thus he gives the crafty ones no chance to act.

He governs by non-action; consequently there is nothing un-governed.

Prescriptions for Politics

Don't glorify the high-brow: cause people not to wrangle.

Don't value limited commodities: cause people not to contemplate stealing.

Don't display the desirable: prevent confusing the people's hearts-'n-minds.

Using these: The governance of sages: empties their hearts-'n-minds, stuffs
their guts

Weakens their resolve, and strengthens their bones.

He treats causing the people to lack both knowledge and desire as constants.

Causing those with knowledge not to venture deeming-actions.

They deem the absence of deeming-action and thus nothing is ungoverned.

If no one esteems the best, men will be free from contention.

If no one values the precious, men will be free from illegal gain.

If men see nothing to desire, their minds will be free from confusion.

Therefore, the wise guides men by relaxing their minds and keeping their bellies firm;

By reducing their wills and letting their physiques become strong.

He always frees men from the search for knowing and demanding.

This means that the knower dares not act for the known.

When action is through non-action, no one is uncultivated.

Not to value one's own virtues is the way to restrain people from striving for wealth.

Not to value the precious is the way to restrain people from theft.

Not to see the desirable is the way to restrain confusion in the mind.

Therefore the wise way to rule is:

not to give importance to oneself,

or try to enrich one's spirit and virtue;

not to be inordinately proud of one's ability,

or try to make unceasing efforts to improve oneself.

Let the people stay free from desire and knowledge in order to avoid the pitfalls that knowledge may bring.

Rule by doing nothing, then everything will be as it should.

Do not exalt talents

So that the people will not contend;

Do not treasure goods hard to come by

So that the people will not steal;

Do not parade enviable things

So that the people will not rebel.

Hence, when the sage man ruled,

He emptied their minds,

Filled their stomachs,

Weakened their ambitions,

Strengthened their bones.

He constantly made the people

Uncrafty and unlustful,

And made them know not to be daring.

He acted not, that is all.

Thus, the state cannot but become well-ruled.

If the exalted are not praised, the humble will not put on airs.

When rare things are not assigned a value, the thief has no reason to steal them.

When the desired object is not shown, the heart has no reason to covet it.

Therefore the sage says:

By emptying their hearts

By filling their stomachs

By weakening their ambition

By strengthening their bones,

He prevents them from knowing what evil is and yearning for good, and this also prevents the knowledgeable ones from acting according to their knowledge.

He governs by non-action,

And therefore, there is nothing that cannot be done.

Non-quiet and non-order in the world are caused by ambition to attain the unattainable,

and by plotting to go from the undesired to the desired.

If people would obey the laws of the world the way the sage does, there would always be balance between body and soul, and peace and serenity would abound in the world.

Not to honor men of worth will keep the people from contention;

not to value goods which are hard to come by will keep them from theft;

not to display what is desirable will keep them from being unsettled of mind.

Therefore
in governing the people, the sage empties their minds but fills their bellies,
weakens their wills but strengthens their bones.

He always keeps them innocent of knowledge and free from desire, and ensures
that the clever never dare to act.

Do
that which consists in taking no action, and order will prevail.

Keeping the People Quiet

Not boasting of one's worth forestalls people's envy.

Not prizing treasures difficult to obtain keeps people from committing theft.

Not contemplating what kindles desire keeps the heart unconfused.

Therefore the holy man when he governs empties the people's hearts but fills their stomachs. He weakens their ambition but strengthens their bones. Always he keeps the people unsophisticated and without desire. He causes that the crafty do not dare to act. When he acts with non-assertion there is nothing ungoverned.

A great man who doesn't display his talent has no rivals. A wealthy man who doesn't flaunt his wealth sees no thieves. The master teaches the value of humility and the futility of ambition. He empties their minds of all they know and helps them extinguish desires. Those who think they know cannot understand him. Don't work at anything, and everything will work.

Where admiration is not bestowed upon the wise,

the populace will not compete for recognition.

Where premium is not placed on rare goods,

the populace will not engage in robbery.

Where desirable items are not on display,

the populace will not be tempted.

Thus,

the sage governs by cleansing [the populace's] hearts,

filling their stomachs,

taming their will,

and strengthening their bodies

- to induce the populace, in time, not to indulge in knowledge nor to cultivate avarice.

So prepared, those with wisdom dare not offer schemes, and laissez-faire governance follows.

With that, no affair is beyond governance.

Never bestow honors and people won't quarrel.

Never prize rare treasures and people won't steal.

Never flaunt alluring things and people won't be confused.

This is how a sage governs.

Fill bellies and empty minds,

strengthen bones and weaken ambition,

always keep the people from knowing and wanting,

then those who know are those who never presume to act.

If you're nothing doing what you do all things will be governed well.

Do not ennoble achievers, so the people will not become contentious;

Do not value rare commodities, so the people will not be tempted to steal;

Do not display temptations, so the people's minds will not be disturbed.

Therefore, a wise ruler would:

Humble the people's minds;

Fill their stomachs;

Weaken their ambitions, and

Strengthen their bodies.

Always keep the people ignorant and devoid of desire,

Even the cunning ones dare not agitate.

Achieve the ideal of taking no action,

Then there will be no misgoverned state.

Being
without esteem for principles

Results in people who do not contend

Being without treasuring goods difficult to obtain

Results in people who do not act as thieves

Being without seeing what one can desire

Results in the minds of people not being confused.

Appropriately
the governing of sages happens.

Baring the mind

Solidifying the center

Lessening the will

Strengthening self-nature

These
entirely result in people

Who are absent of knowing and absent of desire

In the end they also result in the wise not venturing to act.

Acting
absent of acting

An absence of being without governing follows.

Not making any special case of cleverness, of ability, will have the result that people will no longer push themselves.

Not to prize rare objects will have the result that no one will continue to steal.

To show nothing as alluring will have the effect of putting the people's hearts at rest.

Therefore the politics of Sages consists in emptying the minds of men and filling their stomachs, in weakening their initiative and strengthening their bones.

Their constant care is to hold the people in ignorance and apathy. They make things such that clever people dare not to act,

for there is nothing that cannot be sorted out through the practice of non-action.

Do not glorify the achievers

So the people will not squabble

Do not treasure goods that are hard to obtain

So the people will not become thieves

Do not show the desired things

So their hearts will not be confused

Thus the governance of the sage:

Empties their hearts

Fills their bellies

Weakens their ambitions

Strengthens their bones

Let the people have no cunning and no greed

So those who scheme will not dare to meddle

Act without contrivance

And nothing will be beyond control

When we glorify achievers and set them aside for special treatment, people will compete aggressively and step over one another to achieve that glory. Similarly, when we place a high value on certain goods, there will be those who plot to take them by force or by trickery.

This determination of value can be rather arbitrary. For instance, what intrinsic goodness does gold have that makes it so much more valuable than other metals? What is so great about gold other than a particular number that people determine and agree upon?

In general, whenever we point to anything as desirable, a wave of disruption ripples through society. People begin to think of ways to get more of the desirable thing, often at the expense of others.

Because of this, a sagacious ruler would refrain from setting aside certain individuals for glorification, or designating certain goods as extremely valuable and putting them on display. These are sure-fire ways of stimulating materialistic desire, which is a bottomless pit.

While the sages empty people's hearts of desires and weaken their ambitions for fame, glory, or material wealth, they would also pay particular attention to the basic needs. As rulers, the sage kings would see to it that the people do not go hungry and enjoy good health. As teachers, the sages would give people teachings that provide spiritual sustenance and promote spiritual health.

When people follow the way of the sages, the few who scheme and plot will find themselves unable to utilize their repertoire of clever ploys. The governance of the sages leaves no room for their contrived tactics, and everything falls into place peacefully and naturally.

Notes

The process described in this chapter - showcasing certain things as valuable and thus stimulating demand - is the basis of advertising and modern consumerism. Every day we see an endless parade of colorful, shiny products in front of us, enticing us and encouraging purchase. Not enough money? No problem! All major credit cards are accepted. Buy it now and pay no interest until next year. This is a limited-time offer, so call now!

The trouble, as many people have already discovered, is that the pleasure of materialistic pursuits is fleeting. We can buy many things, but never lasting satisfaction. We can be surrounded by many of the colorful and shiny products and still feel a profound sense of emptiness.

The solution to this cannot be found on the Home Shopping Network or in the Sears Catalog. It is not available by mail order or on the Internet. You will not see it at the shopping mall or your local stores. It isn't a colorful and shiny product. In fact, it isn't a thing at all.

Ultimately, it is what people really want and need. But because it isn't a thing, it does not look enticing, nor does it encourage purchase or anything else. It cannot be showcased or paraded in front of people - so some of them may never find it. It cannot be put on a credit card and there is no financing available. It doesn't costs anything - so those who do find it may assume it has no value and cast it aside. They may find it only to let it slip through their fingers.

To those who know what it is, no explanation is necessary. To those who do not, no explanation will suffice. Such is the nature of the Tao.

Translation

Quite a few translators render "hard-to-obtain goods" as "rare goods." This is close, but not quite the same thing. The former is the literal, word-for-word translation; the latter is an interpreted meaning.

Goods that are difficult to acquire may simply have a high price tag; they are not necessarily "rare" in the sense of being uncommon or hard to find. For instance, diamond rings are expensive and therefore relatively hard to get, but they are readily available and quite easily found for most people.

In this chapter, Lao Tzu is talking about high-value items (such as jewelry) that are hoarded and thus become the target of thieves. There is no need to bring in the additional context of rarity into the mix. Doing so introduces a subtle distortion in the translation, which should be avoided if at all possible.

Neglecting to praise the worthy deters people from emulating them; just as not prizing rare treasures deters a man from becoming a thief; or ignoring the things which awaken desire keeps the heart at rest.

Therefore the wise ruler does not suggest unnecessary things, but seeks to satisfy the minds of his people. He seeks to allay appetites but strengthen bones. He ever tries by keeping people in ignorance to keep them satisfied and those who have knowledge he restrains from evil. If he, himself, practices restraint then everything is in quietness.

Do not honor (shang) the worthy (hsien),

So that the people will not contend (cheng) with one another.

Do not value (kuei) hard-to-get goods,

So that the people will not turn robbers.

Do not show objects of desire (k'o yü),

So that the people's minds (hsin) are not disturbed.

Therefore, when the sage rules:

He empties the minds (hsin) of his people,

Fills their bellies,

Weakens their wills (chih),

And strengthens their bones.

Always he keeps his people in no-knowledge (wu-chih) and no-desire (wu-yü),

Such that he who knows dares not act.

Act by no-action (wu-wei),

Then, nothing is not in order.

Leaders Work Humbly

Leaders should not seek power or status; people will not then crave power or status. If scarce good are not valued highly, people will have no need to steal them. If there is nothing available to arouse passion, people will remain content and satisfied.

The truly wise lead by instilling humility and open-mindedness, by providing for fair livelihoods, by discouraging personal ambition, and by helping people to be upright.

The wise avoid evil and radical reform; thus the foolish do not obstruct them. They work serenely, with inner quiet.

Glorify the superior, hatch jealousy and competition.

Value possessions, provoke stealing.

Stimulate desire, enflame the passions.

Therefore, the Tao–Master would rule

by emptying minds and filling bellies,

by weakening desire and strengthening bodies.

He would lead the people away from knowing and wanting

and would try to prevent those with knowledge

from interfering.

Practice non–ado, and everything will fall into place.

Three

Not exalting the gifted prevents quarreling.

Not collecting treasures prevents stealing.

Not seeing desirable things prevents confusion of the heart.

The wise therefore rule by emptying hearts and stuffing bellies, by weakening
ambitions and strengthening bones.

If men lack knowledge and desire, then clever people will not try to interfere.

If nothing is done, then all will be well.

Keep the people from contention by disregarding men of abilities;

Keep the people from theft by not valuing rare goods;

Keep the people from the disturbed state of mind by concealing what is desirable.

That is why in governing the people

The sage simplifies their minds but fills up their stomachs;

weakens their wills, but strengthens their bones.

By keeping the people from knowledge and desires,

He disables wise men from taking any active action.

Act in accordance with this principle of inaction

And the world will be kept in order everywhere.

If you do not exalt the worthy,

You will keep the people from contention.

If you do not treasure rare goods,

You will keep them from stealing.

If you do not exhibit things that may arouse their desire,

You will keep their minds in peace.

Therefore the sage, in governing the people,

Makes their minds empty,

Their stomachs full,

Their ambitions weak,

Their bones strong.

Do not venerate the intelligentsia,

So that people will not rival.

Do not value rare objects,

So that people will not steal.

Do not display any desirable goods,

So that people will not be tempted.

Therefore, the sage rules the people by

Emptying their hearts, filling their stomachs,

Diminishing their desires and strengthening their bones.

He constantly makes people devoid of cunning and ambition,

So much so that even a rabid rabble-rouser among them

Is not able to stir up any trouble.

By practising non-action,

The rule will be peaceful.

Peace to the People

An Min

Do not exalt the worthy,

So that the people will not contend.

Do not treasure hard-to-get objects,

So that the people will not become thieves.

Keep what is desirable out of sight,

So that their heart will not get excited.

Therefore, in ruling the people the Sage

Empties their hearts,

Fills their bellies,

Weakens their aspirations,

Strengthens their bones.

He always makes them guileless and desireless,

And makes the guileful ones afraid to interfere.

Practice non-interference,

And there will never be any misrule.

If we donot exalt superior persons into positions of authority,

We shall not arouse jealous conflicts among the people.

If we do not prize unduly such objects as are hard to procure,

We shall do away with thieves.

If we do not make a show of things that excite desire,

The heart sof the people will remain calm and unconfused.

The Sage governs: By emptying people's hearts of desire and their minds of envy, and by filling their stomachs with

what they need;

By reducing their ambitions and by strengthening their bones and sinews;

By striving to keep them without the knowledge of what is evil and without cravings.

Thus are the crafty ones given no scope for tempting interference.

For it is by Non-action that the Sage governs, and nothing is really left uncontrolled.

Don't exalt the worthy:

People then will not compete.

Don't prize rare goods:

People then will not steal.

Don't show what is covetable:

The people's hearts won't be upset.

Thus, when the sage rules,

He empties hearts

And fills bellies,

Weakens ambitions

And strengthens bones.

He leads the people

To not-know and not-want,

And the cunning ones dare not do.

By doing nothing-doing, everything is set in order.

When the superior are not exalted, envy will not be aroused.

Then there will be no rivalry or contention among people.

When wealth is not treasured, desire for possessions will not be stirred up.

Then people will not be tempted to rob one another.

By shutting that which is desirable out of sight, the heart will remain undisturbed.

Then there will be no confusion in the hearts of people.

The guidance of the Universal One of natural wholeness is therefore:

Empty your mind.

Enjoy good health.

Weaken your ambitions.

Strengthen your essence.

When people are free from cunning, desire, and artifice, everything will be well-ordered of its own accord.

III.

Resting
the People

Rewarding
not the talented from fierce contention frees,

With
wealth unprized, the people will not take to thievish arts,

Not seeing
what awakes desire will keep the mind at ease,

And
so the sage s governing unloads the people s hearts.

He
fills the stomach, strengthens bones, and calms the daring will,

He
causes people not to know desires they should not hold,

And
those who know of such he keeps, from reckless daring, still,

He
acts the nothing acting, and there s nothing uncontrolled.

Exalt not men, so that the people may not fight.

Prize not rare objects, so that the people may not steal.

Look not on desirable things, so that the people's hearts be not troubled.

That is why the self-controlled man governs by stilling the emotions, by quieting thought, by mastering the will, by increasing strength.

He always teaches the people to know the Inner Life, to desire the Inner Life.

He teaches the Masters of knowledge to cease from activity, to act through activity of the Inner Life; then Inner Life will govern all.

By
not making great the worthy

you
will cause the people

to
stop from having enemies and fighting.

(When
everyone is equal, each is rewarded fairly.)

By
not giving value to

goods
hard to get,

you
will cause the people

to
stop from robbing and stealing.

(When
material goods have no value there is no temptation to steal.)

By
not showing

what
people would like to have,

you
will cause the people's hearts

to
remain undisturbed.

(When
people are not tempted to own things they do not desire things.)

Therefore,
the Complete Thinker's way of governing begins by

Emptying
the heart of wants,

Filling
the belly with food,

Relaxing
the ambitions, (not creating a temptation),

Toughening
the bones, (guiding a healthful life).

In
this way will cause

the
people to remain

without
strategy

and
without desire,

and
prevent the knowing ones

from
causing any trouble.

Practice
doing things at the Proper Speed, and everything

will
be in order.

Not exalting ability ensures that the people do not strive.

Not prizing goods that are difficult to obtain ensures that the people do not become robbers.

Not showing them what they might desire ensures that the people do not feel disturbed in their hearts.

Therefore the Saint, in the exercise of government, empties their hearts and fills their bellies, weakens their wills and strengthens their bones, thus constantly ensuring that the people are without knowledge and without desires and that those who have knowledge dare not act. He practices Non-action and consequently there is nothing that is not well governed.

Not to value and employ men of superior ability is the way to

keep the people from rivalry among themselves; not to prize articles

which are difficult to procure is the way to keep them from becoming

thieves; not to show them what is likely to excite their desires is

the way to keep their minds from disorder.

Therefore
the sage, in the exercise of his government, empties

their minds, fills their bellies, weakens their wills, and strengthens

their bones.

He
constantly (tries to) keep them without knowledge and without

desire, and where there are those who have knowledge, to keep them

from presuming to act (on it). When there is this abstinence from

action, good order is universal.

Not praising the Ego prevents people from competing fiercely.
Not hoarding-away
the rarest treasures prevents people from stealing.
Not making a forbidden
'icon' of what the people enjoy prevents revolution.
Therefore;
Sages, in 'ruling' make themselves ordinary;
they satisfy all appetites,
and fulfill everyone's Libido.
They build-up the people, soundly; and slake
every need with reward.
They insure that what is taught does not cause violence;

and THAT IS ALL that they insure-against.
Thus,
their 'rule' is universal.

If
you love accumulation

Gain and increase every day

Thieves and robbers will be waiting

Just to take it all away

Best
to be so empty-headed

That it seems you've lost it all

You will know you're on the way

Though others say you're at a stall

BY not exalting the talented you will cause the people to cease from rivalry and contention.

By not prizing goods hard to get, you will cause the people to cease from robbing and stealing.

By not displaying what is desirable, you will cause the people's hearts to remain undisturbed.

Therefore, the Sage's way of governing begins by

Emptying the heart of desires,

Filling the belly with food,

Weakening the ambitions,

Toughening the bones.

In this way he will cause the people to remain without knowledge and without desire, and prevent the knowing ones from any ado.

Practice Non-Ado, and everything will be in order.

If you glorify the worthy, you will bring forth strife.

Overvaluing possessions induces thievery.

If you desire the expensive, your heart will never loosen.

The master leads by clearing people's minds,

He fills their inner being, weakens their ambitions, and strengthens their bones.

He helps people lose all that they know.

If people lack cleverness and desire, then they will not presume to act, and harmony will reign.

By not striving, he maintains his inner harmony,

And remains at peace within himself.

If you over esteem talented individuals,

people will become overly competitive.

If you overvalue possessions,

people will begin to steal.

Do
not display your treasures

or people will become envious.

The
Master leads by

emptying people's minds,

filling their bellies,

weakening their ambitions,

and making them become strong.

Preferring simplicity and freedom from desires,

avoiding the pitfalls of knowledge and wrong action.

For
those who practice not-doing,

everything will fall into place.

The wise leader does not make a show of holiness or pass out grades for good performance. That would create a climate of success and failure. Competition and jealousy follow.

Emphasizing material success is the same: those who have a lot become greedy, and those who have little become thieves.

When you reinforce appearances, people scramble to please.

The wise leader pays respectful attention to all behaviour. Thus the group becomes open to more and more possibilities of behaviour. People learn a great deal when they are open to everything and not just figuring out what pleases the teacher.

The leader shows that style is no substitute for substance, that knowing certain facts is not more powerful than simple wisdom, that creating an impression is not more potent than acting from one's center.

The students learn that effective action arises out of silence and a clear sense of being. In this they find a source of peace. They discover that the person who is down-to-earth can do what needs doing more effectively than the person who is merely busy.

Do not exalt people who are extraordinarily talented

Or the people will become competitive.

Do not value precious goods

Or the people will become thieves.

Do not make a public display of riches and finery

Or the people's hearts will be envious and discontent.

Therefore, the wise leader will empty their hearts of coveting

and fil their bellies with sustainance.He discourages their ambition

and strengthens their bones.

If the people are simple and free from desire,

the crafty will not dare to take advantage of them.

By practicing "not doing," nothing will remain undone.

Exalting
people creates the desire in others

to be exalted and therefore creates tension.

Overvaluing
goods creates the desire for

ownership

and therefore creates the temptation to

steal.

When
people do not distinguish things as valuable,

they remain focused on the oneness of all

things

and do not become confused in the material

world.

Therefore,
harmonious leaders empty the people's

minds

but nourish their bodies.

They undermine desires

and improve endurance.

They
keep the people focused on their oneness with

Infinity

and free them from attachments to material

things.

They
redirect the energies of those

who would manipulate others.

If
you remember your oneness with Infinity,

and flow with life by refusing to distinguish

good and bad,

you will flow in the peace and harmony

that is the essence of Infinity.

Do not esteem Wisdom, and people will not argue.

Do not covet unobtainable goods, and people will not steal.

Do not harbor desires, and peoples' hearts will not be confused.

Thus does the wise man govern.

Empty the mind and fill the stomach.

Weaken the ambition and strengthen the body.

Often, if people are ignorant, they have no motivation,

and when informed will not venture to act.

Govern without acting.

Rule without administration.

Do not exalt the gifted, and the people will not be jealous.

Do not prize rare treasures, and the people will not steal them.

Do not display desirable things, and the hearts of the people will not be distracted.

Therefore the wise ruler:

Empties their hearts and fills their bellies;

Weakens their ambitions and strengthens their bones.

He keeps the people without knowledge and free from desire

So that those who know dare not act.

He acts without acting and everything is kept in order.

Worship no sage,

And people will not struggle for vanity.

Treasure no rare goods,

And people will not steal them.

Dangle no tantalizer,

And people will not be confused in mind and will.

Therefore,

The wise politics fills the stomach rather than the mind,

Strengthens the bones and muscles rather than the will,

And enables people to be rather than to desire to be.

Indeed, it is through doing nothing misleading

That the greatest political success can be achieved.

Not promoting the wise and worthy brings it about that the people are not contentious.

Not prizing goods hard to come by brings it about that the people do not become thieves

Not paying attention to the desirable brings it about that the people's minds do not become disordered.

And so, the government of the Wise Person: Empty their minds, fill their bellies weaken their ambitions, strengthen their bones.

Always bring it about that the people are without knowledge and without desires. Bring it about that the clever ones do not presume to set about doing.

Do Not Doing and nothing will be left un-governed.

If the chosen are not exalted, no one envies them. If material treasures are not praised, no one steals them. In other words, if the objects of passions are not shown off, there are no temptations.

The wise ruler does not create such temptations to people but takes care that people have enough food. This eliminates passions and strengthens people's health. Yes, the wise ruler always strives to prevent temptations and passions and does not let evil people act.

The absence of these problems brings calm.

A read leader is always humble.

He doesn't show strength,

Thus, around him there is no confrontation.

He doesn't show precious things,

Thus, people won't steal.

He doesn't show things people would wish to have,

Thus, corruption won't arise.

The Wise one leads people,

Keeping their hearts pure and giving them food.

They do not know ambition,

The wise one keeps them healthy

And, far from bad actions.

He wishes good to all,

Thus, the bad people could not act.

His leadership is subtle, all people live in peace.

"Do
not elevate the worthies, so that the people shall not contend. Do not value
scarce commodities, so that the people shall not become robbers. Do not display
desirable things, so that minds shall not become disordered.'' For this reason,
the governance of the Sage lies in voiding the minds of the people, filling
their bellies, weakening their ambitions, and strengthening their bones. The
Sage always causes the people to have no knowledge and no desires and causes
the ones who do know not to dare to act. Because [the Sage] engages in non-activity,
there is nothing he fails to bring to order.

Exalt not the worthy, so that the people will not fight.

Prize not the rare treasure, so that they will not steal.

Exhibit not the desirable, so that their hearts will not be distracted.

Therefore in governing, the Sage

empties the people's hearts and fills their stomachs,

weakens their will and strengthens their bones.

He always keeps them void of knowledge and desire, so that those who know will not dare to act.

Acting through inaction, he leaves nothing ungoverned.

Keeping Peace

Do not exalt the very gifted,

And people will not contend.

Do not trasure goods that are hard to get,

And people will not become thieves.

Do not focus on desires,

And people's minds will not be confused.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals lead others by

Opening their minds,

Reinforcing their centers,

Relaxing their desires,

Strengthening their characters.

Let the people always act without strategy or desire;

Let the clever not venture to act.

Act without action,

And nothing is without order.

Put a value on items in the village and people will want to steal them. Put a value on leaders and people will want to overthrow them. Prize a songbird and he will become caged. Lose this concept. Empty your mind of such notions. Desires and wants lead you away from the Dao. Wu-wei brings you closer.

If those who are excellent find no preferment,

The people will cease to contend for promotion.

If goods that are hard to obtain are not favored,

The people will cease to turn robbers or bandits.

If things much desired are kept under cover,

Disturbance will cease in the minds of the people.

The
Wise Man's policy, accordingly,

Will be to empty people's hearts and minds,

To fill their bellies, weaken their ambition,

Give them sturdy frames and always so,

To keep them uninformed, without desire,

And knowing ones not venturing to act.

Be
still while you work

And keep full control

Over all.

Refrain from exalting capable men, so that the people shall not compete.

Refrain from valuing rare goods, so that the people shall not steal.

Refrain from displaying anything which arouses desires, so that the people's hearts will not be disturbed.

Therefore the government of (under Heaven) the sage lies in:

Simplifying the people's minds,

Filling their bellies,

Weakening their ambitions,

Strengthening their bones,

And always keeping the people innocent of knowledge and desires.

(Thus) anyone who thinks himself clever is afraid of meddling.

By handling affairs on the principle of nonaction everyone will do well.

Do not exalt the worthy [xian], and so keep the common folk from contention.

Do not value goods hard to get, and so stop the common folk from becoming thieves.

Do not let them see desirable things, and so spare the hearts/minds of the common folk from disorder.

Therefore the way the sage governs is to keep their hearts/minds empty and their bellies full.

He keeps their wills weak and their bones strong.

He always keeps the common folk free from the capacity for knowing and from feeling desire.

And prevents the knowledgeable from ever daring to act.

Because he acts without conscious effort, nothing remains ungoverned.

1. By not elevating the worthy, you bring it about that people will not compete.

2. By not valuing goods that are hard to obtain, you bring it about that people
will not act like thieves.

3. By not displaying the desirable you bring it about that people will not be
confused.

4.
Therefore, in the government of the Sage:

5. He empties their minds,

6. An fills their bellies.

7. Weakens their ambition,

8. And strengthens their bones.

9.
He constantly causes the people to be without knowledge and without desires.

10. If he can bring it about that those with knowledge simply do not dare to
act,

11. Then there is nothing that will not be in order.

If you toss
compliments around freely,

people will waste time trying to impress you.

If you give things too much value,

you're going to get ripped off.

If you fulfill people's desires,

you'll only leave them dissatisfied.

The Master leads

by clearing the crap out of people's heads

and opening their hearts.

He lowers their aspirations

and makes them suck in their guts.

He shows people how to forget

what they know and what they want,

so nobody can push them around.

If you think you've got the answers,

he'll mess with your head.

Stop doing stuff
all the time,

and watch what happens.

.

Simplicity

Do not exalt the worthy,

so that people will not compete.

Do not value rare treasure,

so that people will not steal.

Do not display objects of desire,

so that people's hearts will not be disturbed.

Therefore the wise lead by keeping

their hearts pure, their bellies full,

their ambitions weak, and their bones strong,

so that the people may be purified

of their thoughts and desires;

and the cunning ones will not interfere.

By acting without interfering, all may live in peace.

Not boasting of merit and not stressing cleverness thus one prevents jealously and quarrels.

Not concerned about possessions and not overestimating valuables thus one avoids greed and theft.

Not considering anything outside as desirable thus one prevents anxiety and discord inside.

Likewise the Awakened One:

He renders men's hearts desireless thereby opening them to abundance.

He decreases their craving thereby increasing their power of realization.

He teaches them to put the inner above the outer to value wisdom higher than knowledge not to act from the outside but from the unmovedness of their inner being.

Thus practicing non-action they find peace and realize:

Through non-action nothing remains undone.

Acting Without The Intent To Control Fate

Lao Tze says,

When I don't promote those men of high character to the position of authority and give them gifts, then people will not strive to follow their examples.

When I don't value those things which are difficult to attain, then people will be kept from becoming thieves.

When I don't let people see things which will excite evil desires, their minds will be kept from becoming disordered.

Therefore, when a sage is in charge of the government, he prefers to humble people's minds, feed their stomachs, weaken their ambitions, and make their frames strong.

He constantly keeps them from knowledge and from desire, and those who have knowledge would not presume to act against this rule.

When practicing acting without the intent to control fate, there is no evil which can't be cured.

WITHOUT SEEKING ACCLAIM

By
retaining his humility,

the talented person who is also wise,

reduces rivalry.

The
person who possesses many things,

but does not boast of his possessions,

reduces temptation, and reduces stealing.

Those
who are jealous of the skills or things

possessed by others,

most easily themselves become possessed by envy.

Satisfied
with his possessions,

the sage eliminates the need to steal;

at one with the Tao,

he remains free of envy,

and has no need of titles.

By
being supple, he retains his energy.

He minimizes his desires,

and does not train himself in guile,

nor subtle words of praise.

By not contriving, he retains

the harmony of his inner world,

and so remains at peace within himself.

It
is for reasons such as these,

that an administration

which is concerned

with the welfare of those it serves,

does not encourage status

and titles to be sought,

nor encourage rivalry.

Ensuring
a sufficiency for all,

helps in reducing discontent.

Administrators
who are wise

do not seek honours for themselves,

nor act with guile

towards the ones they serve.

If you overesteem great men,

people become powerless.

If you overvalue possessions,

people begin to steal.

The Master leads

by emptying people's minds

and filling their cores,

by weakening their ambition

and toughening their resolve.

He helps people lose everything

they know, everything they desire,

and creates confusion

in those who think that they know.

Practice not-doing,

and everything will fall into place.

Promote no exalted persons, thus enabling the people to cease competition.

Prize no rare goods, thus enabling the people to cease robbery.

Don't display desirable things.

Let people's minds be undisturbed.

A Sage ruler enabled them to be tranquil in their hearts;

be filled in their stomachs;

be weakened in their ambitions;

be strengthened in their will.

He made them less intelligent and less desirous.

If intelligent people are made afraid of doing wrong, then no one in the world can not be governed.

Do not exalt intelligence and people will not compete;

Do not value rare goods and people will not steal;

Do not display for public view and people will not desire.

So the sage's governing methods are:

Emptying the mind,

Vitalizing the stomach,

Softening the will,

Strengthening the character.

This always makes people not know and not desire.

This always makes the knower dare not act.

Therefore, nothing is beyond ruling.

III

Give
rewards, and someone will fight for them

Prize rarities, and someone will try to steal them

Offer all that anyone could desire, and someone will be confused and angry

When
one must lead, one must lead people back to themselves

Fill their needs but drain their compulsions

Harden their bones but soften their opinions

Where they feel the need to chase after fashion or stand for some cause

Be quiet and listen, so they will speak cautiously and hesitant to act *

So long as they are cautious, all things will fall into place

Not Exalting Cleverness

Not exalting cleverness

causes the people not to contend.

Not putting high prices on hard-to-get goods

causes the people not to steal.

Not seeing anything to want

causes the mind not to be confused.

Therefore the government of sages

empties the mind and fills the middle,

weakens the ambition and strengthens the bones,

always keeping the people innocent and passionless.

it makes the sophisticated not dare to contrive;

action being without contrivance,

nothing is disordered.

Do not glorify the elite, and people will not compete.

Do not treasure rare things, and people will not steal them.

Do not let people see things that induce desire, and people will not commit crimes.

Thus,

the sage will make people know less, but feed them well;

make them less ambitious, but physically strong;

make people less knowledgeable and have less desire.

This way, even knowledgeable people would not dare to have ambition.

Do not coerce people, and then they are not difficult to rule.

Do not exalt the talented, and the people cease from rivalry and contention.

Do not prize goods hard to get, and the people cease from robbing and stealing.

Do not display what is desirable, and the people's hearts remain undisturbed.

Therefore, the sage's way of governing is: emptying the mind, filling the belly, weakening the will, toughening the bones.

In this way he will cause the people to remain without knowledge and without desire, and prevent the knowing ones from any doing.

Doing "non-doing", and everything will be in order.

Not respect sages, no argument.

Not value treasures, no stealing.

Not seeing desirable things, no confusion of the heart.

Thus, sages rule by emptying people's hearts (keep them ignorant),

filling their bellies, weakening their ambitions, and strengthening their
bones.

Let people ignorant and lack desire,

Then, smart ones, afraid of doing (smart things),

But doing Wu-Wei, and nothing will not be done.

Not exalting the talented prevents rivalry.

Not valuing goods that are hard to obtain

prevents stealing.

Not displaying desirable things

prevents confusion of the heart.

Therefore,
the True Person governs by

emptying the heart of desire

and filling the belly with food,

weakening ambitions

and strengthening bones.

If
the people are simple and free from desire,

then the clever ones never dare to interfere.

Practice
action without striving

and all will be in order.

By
not saying

one is better than the other

we prevent argument.

By turning down

promises and rewards of another life

we eliminate competition for heaven.

If other realms of existence

are not promoted as new and improved

religions will not seek converts.

Empty the heart and mind of ambition,

fill the stomachs of the hungry,

live simply without material and intellectual treasures,

live simply by your own physical labor.

People
are led best when information is value-free

and their basic needs and wants are fulfilled.

This way people in power cannot manipulate and interfere.

Through
nonaction and noninterference

all becomes better.

Stop looking for rare, moral persons (hsien) to put in power.

There will be jealousies among people, jealousies and strife.

If we cease to set store by products that are hard to get, there will be less
outright thieves.

If the people never see such things as excite desire, their hearts can remain
placid and undisturbed.

Therefore the wise one rules by emptying their hearts [like the clown]. He fills
their bellies, weakens their brightness and toughens their bones,

ever striving to make the people without knowledge.

He
sees to it that if there are any who are bright and clever, they dare not interfere.

Through his non-do actions all [such subjection] runs well [for some time].

Not exalting men of worth prevents the people from competing;

Not putting high value on rare goods prevents the people from being bandits;

Not displaying objects of desire prevents the people from being disorderly.

For these reasons,

The sage, in ruling,

hollows their hearts,

stuffs their stomachs,

weakens their wills,

builds up their bones,

Always causing the people to be without knowledge and desire.

He ensures that the knowledgeable dare not be hostile,

and that is all.

Thus,

His rule is universal.

Avoiding distinctions of merit among the people prevents jealousy.

Not setting a value on rare things prevents theft.

Not seeking the things of peace keeps the mind in peace.

Thus the Sage governs by ridding the heart of its desires; giving the stomach due satisfaction, by resting the muscles and strengthening the bones, by preserving the world from a knowledge of evil and hence from its desire, and by making those who have such knowledge afraid to use it.

He cacts by non-action, and by this he governs all.

Distractions

Possessions may burden a relationship.

They distract, delude, and divide

instead of creating closeness and intimacy.

They create confusion and dissatisfaction

instead of peace and joy.

Quiet your noisy mind.

Simplify your busy life.

Reduce your many distractions

so that you and your beloved

might live in deepest joy.

Consider the things you have accumulated.

Do they enhance your love

and increase your intimacy?

Or have they siphoned energy

from the things you once knew to be important;

walks, talks, leisurely love-making, laughter, and play?

Do not exalt the worthy, so that the people shall not compete.

Do not value rare treasures, so that the people shall not steal.

Do not display objects of desire, so that the people's hearts shall not be disturbed.

Therefore in the government of the sage, He keeps their hearts
vacuous, Fills their bellies, Weakens their ambitions, And strengthens
their bones,

He always causes his people to be without knowledge (cunning) or desire, And the crafty to be afraid to act.

By acting without action, all things will be in order.

It is better
not to make merit a matter of reward

Lest people conspire and contend,

Not to pile up rich belongings

Lest they rob,

Not to excite by display

Lest they covet.

A sound leader's aim

Is to open people's hearts,

Fill their stomachs,

Calm their wills,

Brace their bones

And so to clarify their thoughts and cleanse their needs

That no cunning meddler could touch them:

Without being forced, without strain or constraint,

Good government comes of itself.

If you do not worship the nobility, there will be no fighting among people.

If you do not value scarce items, there will be no stealing.

If you do not show people temptations, their hearts will not be wild.

Therefore, the great men's ways of governing people were:

To remove their greed but fill their stomachs,

To weaken their ambition but strengthen their bodies.

Always keep them without knowledge and without desires,

And this prevents those clever manipulators from doing anything.

When the learned is not over esteemed,

There will not be unnecessary competition amongst people.

When the treasure is not over valued,

There will not be acts of stealing amongst people.

When we do not show people things that stir up their wants,

Their minds will not be disturbed.

Therefore, the sage governs the people by

Restoring balance in value and worth, through

Emptying people's minds and filling their essence,

Weakening their ambition and strengthening their character,

Freeing them from knowledge and wants, and

Keeping the learned from over exercising their authority.

Act in accordance with the principle of non-action - of eternal balance,

Then order will arise of itself.

Worship no sage,

And people will not struggle for vanity.

Treasure no rare goods,

And people will not steal them.

Dangle no tantalizer,

And people will not be confused in mind and will.

Therefore,

The wise politics fills the stomach rather than the mind,

Strengthens the bones and muscles rather than the will,

And enables people to be rather than to desire to be.

Indeed, it is through doing nothing misleading

That the greatest political success can be achieved.

If you glorify the worthy, you will bring forth strife.

Overvaluing possessions induces thievery.

If you desire the expensive, your heart will never loosen.

The master leads by clearing people's minds,

He fills their inner being, weakens their ambitions, and strengthens their bones.

He helps people lose all that they know.

If people lack cleverness and desire, then they will not presume to act, and harmony will reign.

By not striving, he maintains his inner harmony,

And remains at peace within himself.

