===== Chapter 22 =====

Crookedness follows perfection.

Bending follows straightness.

Emptiness follows fullness.

Brokenness follows newness.

Lack follows gain.

Excess follows confusion.

Therefore, the sages embrace the One

Becoming examples for the world:

They do not show themselves, and so are radiant.

Do not affirm themselves, and so are made known.

Do not brag about themselves, and so have merit.

Do not throw their weight around, and so are leaders.

Precisely because they do not contend

Is the reason the world cannot contend with them.

That which is said of old:

"That which is crooked follows perfection"—

How can it be an empty saying?

Truly perfect and return to it.

Crippled become whole, Crooked becomes straight, Hollow becomes full,
Worn becomes new, Little becomes more, Much becomes delusion.

Therefore the Sages cling to the One And take care of this world;

Do not display themselves And therefore shine. Do not assert themselves
and therefore stand out. Do not praise themselves And therefore succeed.

Do not contend And therefore no one under heaven Can contend with them.

The old saying Crippled becomes whole Is not empty words. It becomes whole and returns.

Be broken and you'll become whole.

Be fallen and you will stand tall.

Be empty and you will fill up.

Be worn and you'll become new.

Have little and you will gain.

Have much and you'll be confused.

Therefore the sage clings to the One

And serves as a guide for the world.

He does not flaunt himself, so he shines bright.

He does not insist on being right, so he is renowned.

He does not brag, so he succeeds.

He does not boast, so he lasts long.

He contends with no one,

So no one can contend with him.

The ancients used to say:

"Be broken and you'll become whole."

Are these but hollow words?

If you are truly whole everything will come to you.

YIELDING

The yielding bend but do not break,

Overcoming all, they are preserved whole.

Being bent, permits straightening.

Being empty and hollow, permits filling.

Being torn, tattered and depleted, permits renewal.

Having little, permits gain and possession.

Having much, permits confusion.

Therefore the Sage embraces unity.

Holding fast to the absolute oneness,

Manifests this as an example to the world.

Not flaunting himself, He becomes luminous to all.

Not bestowing himself with self-importance, He becomes both prominent and illustrious.

Not boasting of himself, He receives both recognition and credit.

Disdaining pride, His works endure.

Not striving to contend nor compete,

He attracts no contention - no competition

Thus, the Sage confirms -

To yield is to overcome, to preserve whole.

To yield is to gain All Things.

Yield to be whole.

Curl in order to straighten.

Empty in order to be filled.

Grow old in order to be renewed.

Reduce in order to receive.

Excess creates confusion.

The sage embraces unity to become Heaven below's (the sacred body's) example.

They do not display themselves, which allows them to shine.

They do not see themselves as being right, which allows them to be outstanding.

They do not show off, which allows them to be rewarded.

They are not arrogant, which allows them to endure.

It is precisely because the masters do not resist Heaven below that no one is able to contest them.

The ancients said yield to be whole.

How can these words possibly be hollow?

True wholeness will be preserved and return to its original state.

THE GUERDON OF MODESTY

The part becometh the whole. The curve becometh straight; the void

becometh full; the old becometh new. He who desireth little

accomplisheth his Will with ease; who desireth many things becometh

distracted.

Therefore,
the sage concentrateth upon one Will, and it is as a light to

the whole world. Hiding himself, he shineth; withdrawing himself, he

attracteth notice; humbling himself, he is exalted; dissatisfied with

himself, he gaineth force to achieve his Will. Because he striveth not,

no man may contend against him.

That
is no idle saw of the men of old; 'The part becometh the whole'; it

is the Canon of Perfection.

What is half will become perfect. What is crooked will become straight.What is empty will be filled. What is old will be rejuvenated. Who haslittle, will receive in plenty. Who has much, will be deprived. The Sageembraces the All and becomes the Idol of the World. He does not look outfor himself, and thus he glories. He does not please himself, and thusthe world possesses him. He does not flaunt his accomplishments, and thusthe world venerates him. He strives not to be on top, thus he will be elevated.He does not attack, and the world around him is still. Truly: Everythingflows freely into the seeker of perfection.

Dissension becomes unity

The impure becomes pure

The voids shall be filled

The old becomes new

One who has nothing, receives everything

One who has a lot, receives nothing

One who is wise cherishes simplicity and in this way he is an example to the world

He is modest and therefore he excels

He doesn't have to prove himself and that's why people trust his words

He has nothing to defend and therefore he is invulnerable

So the aphorism of the wise of old "The imperfect becomes perfect" is true

The perfect considers the world as his home

Submit to Nature if you would reach your goal. For, whoever deviates from Nature's way, nature forces back again. Whoever gives up his desire to improve upon Nature will find Nature satisfying all his needs. Whoever finds his desires extinguished will find more desires arising of their own accord. Whoever desires little is easily satisfied. Whoever desires much suffers frustration.

Therefore, the intelligent person is at one with Nature, and so serves as a model for others.

By not showing off, he is exemplary. By not asserting that he is right, he does the right thing. By not boasting of what he will do, he succeeds in doing more than he promises.

By not gloating over his successes, his achievements are acclaimed by others. By not competing with others, he achieves without opposition.

Therefore the old saying is not idle talk: "Submit to Nature if you would reach your goal." For that is the only genuine way.

"To remain whole, be twisted!"

To become straight, let yourself be bent.

To become full, be hollow.

Be tattered, that you may be renewed.

Those that have little, may get more,

Those that have much, are but perplexed.

Therefore the ; Sage

Clasps the Primal Unity,

Testing by it everything under heaven.

He does not show himself; therefore he seen everywhere.

He does not define himself, therefore he is distinct.

He does not boast of what he will do, therefore he succeeds.

He is not proud of his work, and therefore it endures.

He does not contend,

And for that very reason no one under heaven can contend with him.

So then we see that the ancient saying "To remain whole, be twisted!" was no idle word;

For true wholeness can only be achieved by return.

Surrender and become whole.

Bend low and be straightened.

Become empty and be filled.

Burn out and be renewed.

Having nothing, beauty is revealed.

Having much, the way is hidden.

The sage abides in One

and thus is master of heaven and earth.

Not being self-absorbed, his vision is clear.

Not asserting himself, his light shines forth.

Not showing off, his merit is obvious.

Not praising himself, praise is showered upon him.

Not contending, nothing under heaven stands in his way.

This ancient saying, "Surrender and become whole,"

is it empty words?

Being whole means all things have returned to you.

The yielding becomes whole

The bent becomes straight

The hollow becomes replenished

The worn becomes renewed

The diminished becomes endowed

The plentiful becomes doubtful

This is why wise ones embrace unity

Adopting nature as model

Without self-display

And thus clear

Without self-righteousness

And thus distinguished

Without self-assertion

And thus having merit

Without self-glorification

And thus enduring

It is only when there is no contending

That none in the world can contend against them

The ancient ones had reasons to claim

"The accommodating becomes whole"

Is this (just) empty talk now?

(When) wholeness is real then one has come home

Expressions of Tao

Bent over, you will be preserved whole;

When twisted, you will be upright;

When hollowed out, you will be full;

When Worn out, you will be renewed;

When you have little, you will attain much;

With much, you will be confused.

Therefore the Sage embrace the One

and in this way becomes shepherd of the World.

He does not show himself off;

Therefore he becomes prominent.

He does not put himself on a display;

Therefore he brightly shines.

He does not brags about himself;

Therefore he receives credit.

He does not praise his own deeds;

Therefore he can long endure.

It is only because he does not compete,

That therefore no one is able to compete with him.

The so called "Bent over, you will be preserved whole"

Of the the ancients was an expression

that was really close to it!

Truly "wholeness" will belong to him.

Allow yourself to yield, and you can stay centered. Allow yourself to bend, and you will stay straight. Allow yourself to be empty, and you'll get filled up. Allow yourself to be exhausted, and you'll be renewed. Having little, you can receive much. Having much, you'll just become confused.

Therefore the sage embraces the oneness and becomes a pattern for the whole world.

She doesn't display herself, so she becomes illuminated. She doesn't justify herself, so she becomes distinguished. She doesn't boast, so she is recognized. She doesn't claim credit, so she advances and endures.

She doesn't contend, so no one can contend with her.

"Yield and you can stay centered"- Is this saying meaningless? Stay whole, and all things return to you.

Yield to the outer, and you remain

Firm and complete within.

Appear crooked to others,

But be straight and true within.

Empty yourself, and be made full;

Strip yourself of excess

And you will know true rejuvenation.

Thus does diminishment attract abundance,

While accumulation nurtures conflict.

Therefore the student of the Sage

Holds humility in his arms;

It protects and supports him.

In refusing to display his insight,

He validates his true nature.

He takes no credit, and makes no claim;

His dignity is his only luster.

Therefore, he neither boasts nor flatters.

He seeks no merit,

Pursues no goal,

Accepts no praise;

And thus he enduringly succeeds.

He contends not with man or nature,

And so no one can defeat him.

Thus the ancient teaching lives

Within this very moment:

"Drop your burden, abandon the superficial,

And you will find your perfect center."

This was not a shallow teaching.

Release your true nature;

Express your inner being;

Return to the Source.

This is all I have to teach.

Be humble; you will remain yourself.

Be flexible, bend, and you will be straight.

Be ever receptive, and you will be satisfied.

Become tired and weary and you will be renewed.

Have
little, you will have enough;

to have abundance is to be troubled.

The
truly wise seek Unity, embrace oneness,

and become examples for all the world.

Not
revealing themselves, they shine;

not self-righteous, they are distinguished;

not self-centered, they are famous;

not seeking glory, they are leaders.

Because
they are not quarrelsome

no one quarrels with them.

Thus
it is as the ancients said:

"To yield is to retain Unity."

The truly wise have Unity,

and the world respects them.

To be crooked is to be perfected; to be bent is to be straightened; to be lowly is to be filled; to be senile is to be renewed; to be diminished is to be able to receive; to be increased is to be deluded.

Therefore the Holy Man embraces unity, and becomes the world's model.

He is not self-regarding, therefore he is cognizant.

He is not egotistic, therefore he is distinguished.

He is not boastful, therefore he has merit.

He is not conceited, therefore he is superior.

Inasmuch as he strives with none, there are none in the world able to strive with him.

That ancient maxim – 'To be crooked is to become perfected' – was it an idle word? Verily, it includes the whole.

'Be humble, and you will remain entire.' Be bent, and you will remain straight. Be vacant, and you will remain full. Be worn, and you will remain new. He who has little will receive. He who has much will be embarrassed.

Therefore the Sage keeps to One and becomes the standard for the world.

He does not display himself; therefore he shines. He does not approve himself; therefore he is noted. He does not praise himself; therefore he has merit. He does not glory in himself; therefore he excels.

And because he does not compete; therefore no one in the world can compete with him.

The ancient saying 'Be humble and you will remain entire'- Can this be regarded as mere empty words? Indeed he shall return home entire.

The Point to Reversal?

If 'crooked' then 'intact'

If 'twisted' then 'straight'

If 'vacuous' then 'filled'

If 'worn out' then 'new'

If 'deficient' then 'endowed'

If 'endowed' then 'confounded'

Using this: Sages embrace one

and deem it the social world's model.

He doesn't see by himself hence is perceptive.

Doesn't affirm himself hence is discerning.

Doesn't attack by himself hence has success.

Doesn't esteem himself hence becomes an elder.

In general: he does not dispute

hence in the social world none is able to dispute with him.

The ancients who said 'If 'crooked' then 'intact''--

could they have offered empty words?

Take 'intact' as sincere and return to it.

To bend is to maintain integrity.

To deviate is to be direct.

To be concave is to be convex.

To be exhausted is to be rejuvenated.

To be wanting is to be endowed.

To have much is to be deprived.

Therefore, the wise identifies opposites as one,

And sets an example for the world.

He remains in concealment and spontaneously is unconcealed.

He does not assert himself, therefore he is eminent.

He does not claim credit, therefore he receives credit.

He is not vain, therefore he is the best.

Because he does not oppose anyone in the world, no one can oppose him.

Thus, the ancient saying "to bend is to maintain integrity" is the word of truth.

Indeed, integrity is attributed to this.

Through no words,

It takes place by itself.

The tortured will seek for the snug.

The bent will seek for the straight.

The hollow will seek for the full.

The worn will seek for the new.

The minor will seek for the major.

The affluent will seek for the perplexed.

Therefore the virtuous man considers unity as the only model for the world.

He does not flaunt himself, therefore he is brilliant.

He does not consider himself right, therefore he is incontestable.

He does not require his fame, therefore he is meritorious.

He does not stick to his own knowledge, therefore he grows.

Only because he does not fight can no one under Heaven fight with him.

The ancient saying 'The tortured will be made snug' is very well put.

It truly enables one to preserve the unity.

"Incomplete shall be complete;

Bent shall be straight;

Hollow shall be full;

Worn shall be new;

Little shall gain;

Much shall delude."

Hence, the sage man

Took hold of One to serve

As shepherd over all under heaven:

He did not look at himself,

Therefore, illustrious;

He did not parade himself,

Therefore, clear-sighted;

He did not brag about himself,

Therefore, meritorious;

He was not conceited,

Therefore, long-enduring.

It is precisely because he did not contend

That none could with him contend.

The ancient saying:

"Incomplete shall be complete" -

Is it mere words?

Truly, it shall end up complete.

Be modest, and you will remain whole.

Be bent, and you will remain straight.

Be empty, and you will remain full.

Be worn out, and you will remain new.

The one who has little will receive.

The one who has a lot will be enslaved.

Therefore the sage guards the one,

And becomes a paradigm for the world.

He does not expose himself, therefore he shines.

He does not make a good name for himself, therefore he is known.

He does not praise himself, therefore he is dear to everyone.

He does not glorify himself, therefore his name is on everyone's lips.

And since he does not compete at all,

There is no one in the world who can compete with him.

The ancient ones said:

Be modest, and you will remain whole.

Can these be meaningless words?

Indeed, he will return home whole.

Bowed down then preserved;

Bent then straight;

Hollow then full;

Worn then new;

A little then benefited;

A lot then perplexed.

Therefore
the sage embraces the One and is a model for the empire.

He
does not show himself, and so is conspicuous;

He does not consider himself right, and so is illustrious;

He does not brag, and so has merit;

He does not boast, and so endures.

It
is because he does not contend that no one in the empire is in a position to
contend with him.

The
way the ancients had it, 'Bowed down then preserved', is no empty saying.

Truly it enables one to be preserved to the end.

Humility's Increase

"The crooked shall be straight,

Crushed ones recuperate,

The empty find their fill.

The worn with strength shall thrill;

Who little have receive,

And who have much will grieve."

Therefore

The holy man embraces unity and becomes for all the world a model.

Not self-displaying he is enlightened;

Not self -approving he is distinguished;

Not self-asserting he acquires merit;

Not self-seeking he gaineth life.

Since he does not quarrel, therefore no one in the world can quarrel with him.

The saying of the ancients: "The crooked shall be straight," is it in any way vainly spoken? Verily, they will be straightened and return home.

Separate yourself and become whole. Yield and become firm. Be empty so you can be filled. Die so you can be reborn. Lose everything you have, and have it all. The master through the Tao sets and example for all. He doesn't show off so his depth is evident. Free from ambition, he can be trusted. Having lost his identity, people can identify with him. Never disagreeing, no one can disagree with him. When the ancient masters said: "Separate yourself and become whole", they weren't doing so lightly. Trust the masters and become whole.

Accommodate and be whole, bend and be straight;

Keep low and be fulfilled, replace old and be new;

Seek little and gain, seek plenty and be bewildered.

Thus, the sage embraces One to set an example for the people of the world.

Not self-touting, one shines;

Not self-justifying, one reassures;

Not self-aggrandizing, one accomplishes;

Not self-serving, one endures.

When one is not in competition, people in the world cannot engage him/her in competition.

Is the old saying "Accommodate and be whole" but empty words?

It can be realized fully.

In yielding is completion.

In bent is straight.

In hollow is full.

In exhaustion is renewal.

In little is contentment.

In much is confusion.

This is how a sage embraces primal unity as the measure of all beneath heaven.

Give up self-reflection

and you're soon enlightened.

Give up self-definition

and you're soon apparent.

Give up self-promotion

and you're soon proverbial.

Give up self-esteem

and you're soon perennial.

Simply give up contention

and soon nothing in all beneath heaven contends with you.

It was hardly empty talk

when the ancients declared

In yielding is completion.

Once you perfect completion

you've returned home to it all.

To yield is to be preserved whole,

To be bent is to become straight,

To be low is to be filled,

To be worn is to be renewed,

To have little is to gain,

To have too much is to be confused.

Thus the sage embraces the One,

And becomes a model for the world. He does not:

Insist on his own views, thus he has a clear view;

Justify himself, thus he sees the truth;

Boast of his achievements, thus he is given credit;

Become arrogant, thus grows in stature.

Simply because he is not contentious,

No one in the world can contend against him.

Is the ancient saying to yield is to be preserved whole, empty words?

It is truly perfect and should be preserved.

Flexibility,
then comes wholeness

Being twisted, then comes straightness

Emptiness, then comes fullness

Shabbiness, then comes newness

Scarcity, then comes obtainment

Abundance, then comes perplexity.

Appropriately
it happens that sages

Embrace oneness

Act as the model of the world

Are not showing themselves so they are luminous

Are not justifying themselves so they are conspicuous

Are not boasting of themselves so outstanding service is
performed

Are not bragging of themselves so they grow

In the end only lack contending

So noone in the world is able to be contending with them.

In
ancient times there was a saying,

That which is flexible becomes whole.

How can these be empty words?

The
essence, whole yet being merged together.

In the old days they said, the incomplete shall be made whole, the bent shall be straightened, the empty shall be filled, the worn shall be renewed. Simplicity makes for success, multiplicity leads one astray.

Therefore the Sage who holds himself to unity, is the model for the empire, (for the world, the ideal man).

He shines, because he does not show off. He imposes himself because he does not claim to be right. One finds merit in him, because he does not brag. He increases constantly because he does not push himself.

As he does not oppose himself to anyone, no one is opposed to him.

The axioms from the old days cited above, are they not full of sense? Yes, towards him who is perfect, (who does nothing to attract to himself), all run spontaneously.

Yield and remain whole

Bend and remain straight

Be low and become filled

Be worn out and become renewed

Have little and receive

Have much and be confused

Therefore the sage holds to the one as an example for the world

Without flaunting oneself - and so is seen clearly

Without presuming oneself - and so is distinguished

Without praising oneself - and so has merit

Without boasting about oneself - and so is lasting

Because he does not contend, the world cannot contend with him

What the ancients called "the one who yields and remains whole"

Were they speaking empty words?

Sincerity becoming whole, and returning to oneself

To yield, when the situation requires yielding, is to remain whole. To bend, like flexible bamboo in the wind, is to remain straight.

To be low is to be filled - just as lowly places tend to be filled with water. To be worn out is to be renewed.

If you don't have much, you are in a position to receive or obtain more; if you have a lot, you are more likely to experience confusion.

Therefore, the sage embraces the unity of the one true Tao, to set a standard and serve as an example for everyone.

The sage does not flaunt, show off, or make himself or herself highly visible in anyway. Ironically, this makes the sage unique, and therefore conspicuous.

The sage does not presume upon his or her own correctness. This distinguishes him or her in a world with so many presumptuous blowhards.

The sage does not praise his or her own efforts. Despite this, or perhaps because of it, the sage ends up with the credit he or she deserves.

The sage does not brag or boast about his or her own prowess. There is no need to when he or she possesses true staying power.

Because the sage does not contend or get defensive, others cannot contend with him or her - there is nothing to attack.

The sage is what the ancients meant when they talked about the one who yields and remains whole - surely they were not speaking idly of empty words!

The sage achieves integrity and wholeness through sincere effort - thereby returning the virtues to himself or herself.

INCREASE BY HUMILITY

At that time the deficient will be made perfect; the distorted will be straightened; the empty will be filled; the worn out will be renewed; those having little will obtain and those having much will be overcome.

Therefore the wise man, embracing unity as he does, will become the world's model. Not pushing himself forward he will become enlightened; not asserting himself he will become distinguished; not boasting of himself he will acquire merit; not approving himself he will endure. Forasmuch as he will not quarrel, the world will not quarrel with him.

Is the old saying, "The crooked shall be made straight," a false saying? Indeed, no! They will be perfected and return rejoicing.

Bent, thus (tse) preserved whole,

Unjustly accused, thus exonerated (chih),

Hollow, thus filled (ying),

Battered (pi), thus renewed,

Scanty, thus receiving (te),

Much, thus perplexed.

Therefore the sage embraces the One (pao i).

He becomes the model (shih) of the world.

Not self-seeing, hence he is enlightened (ming).

Not self-justifying, hence he is outstanding.

Not showing off (fa) his deeds, hence he is meritorious.

Not boasting (ching) of himself, hence he leads (chang).

Because he is not contentious (pu cheng),

Hence no one under heaven can contend with him.

What the ancients say: "Bent, thus preserved whole,"

Are these empty words?

Be preserved whole and return (kuei).

Be humble; you will remain yourself. Be flexible, bend, and you will be straight. Be ever receptiveand you will be satisfied. Become tired and weary and you will be renewed. Have little, you will have enough; to have abundance is to be troubled.

Thus, the truly wise seek Unity, they embrace oneness, and become examples for all the world. Not revealing themselves, they shine; not self-righteous, they are distinguished; not self-centered, they are famous; not seeking glory, they are leaders.

Because they are not quarrelsome no one quarrels with them.

Thus it is as the ancients said: "To yield is to retain Unity." The truly wise have Unity, and the world respects them.

To be whole, let yourself break.

To be straight, let yourself bend.

To be full, let yourself be empty.

To be new, let yourself wear out.

To have everything, give everything up.

The Tao–Master clings to the Tao and becomes a model for all.

He doesn't put on a show, but his light shines forth.

He doesn't justify himself, but he is known for his integrity.

He doesn't boast, but he is recognized as accomplished.

He doesn't contend with others, and thus no one contends with him.

The old saying, "Surrender and conquer," is not an empty slogan.

Surrender to the Tao and find yourself completed.

Twenty-two

Yield and overcome;

Bend and be straight;

Empty and be full;

Wear out and be new;

Have little and gain;

Have much and be confused.

Therefore the wise embrace the one

And set an example to all.

Not putting on a display,

They shine forth.

Not justifying themselves,

They are distinguished.

Not boasting,

They receive recognition.

Not bragging,

They never falter.

They do not quarrel,

So no one quarrels with them.

Therefore the ancients say, "Yield and overcome."

Is that an empty saying?

Be really whole,

And all things will come to you.

Bow down and you are preserved;

Bend and you can be straight;

Hollow, then full;

Worn, then new;

Seek a little and you get a lot;

Seek a lot and you get perplexed.

Thus the sage adheres to this One principle (Tao)

And regards it as the pattern of all things.

Show off yourself not and you become conspicuous;

Regard yourself not as infallible and you become illustrious;

Brag about yourself not and you gain achievement;

Boast of yourself not and you become a head.

One does not contend with others,

So nobody in the world can win him in contention.

The ancients' saying "Bow down and you are preserved"

Is surely not an empty saying,

Which can be really proved effective.

To yield is to remain whole;

To bend is to get up straight;

To be hollow is to be full;

To decay is to renew;

To be small is to gain;

To have many is to be perplexed.

Therefore the sage,

Embracing the One, becomes the model for all under Heaven.

He does not show himself, therefore his presence is bright.

He does not claim to be right, therefore his virtue shines.

He is not boastful of his act, therefore his merit is great.

He is not conceited, therefore he is long-lasting.

Only because he does not contend,

No one under Heaven can contend with him.

Can the old saying "To yield is to remain whole"

Be an empty phrase?

Truly, he remains whole, and the world returns to him.

To preserve your life, you have to be pliable.

That which is bent will soon be straightened.

The lowest ground will be filled by water.

Old and tattered things will soon be replaced.

To gain real insights, you must be focused.

Dealing with too many things concurrently can only lead to confusion.

The sage embraces the essence of Dao.

He thus sets an example for others to follow.

Not trying to be prominent is why he is famous.

Not pretending to be a know-all is why he is distinguished.

Not wanting to claim credit is why he is acclaimed.

Not bragging about his ability is why he has advanced.

Because he is not contending, no one can compete with him.

The ancient saying that to be pliable is to preserve oneself is not just empty rhetoric.

It is through following the way of Dao that self-preservation is assured.

Strength to the Humble

I Ch'ien

To be crooked is to become perfect;

To be bent is to become straight;

To be hollow is to become full;

To be worn out is to be renewed;

To have little is to receive more;

To have plenty is to be perplexed.

Therefore, the Sage embraces the One,

And serves as model for the world.

As he does not like to show off, he is enlightened;

As he is not prone to be self-righteous, he is distinguished;

As he does not blow his own horn, he acquires merit;

As he does not extol himself, he is fit to be a leader.

And it is precisely because he does not contend,

That no one under heaven can contend with him.

The ancient saying "To be crooked is to become perfect"

Surely is not an empty remark.

The world goes to him who is truly perfect.

"If in humility you adapt yourself, you will remain complete."

If bent, you will become straight again;

If emptied, you willbecome full again;

If worn, you will be renewed.

He who has little may receive;

He who has much may be embarrassed.

Thus it is that the Sage embraces the One Tao and is an example for the world.

He does not seek to shine: therefore he is illumined.

He does not rpide himself on being rihgt: therefore his rightness speaks for itself.

He does not sing his own praises: therefore he succeeds.

He does not boast of what he achieves: therefore his work endures.

He contends with none: therefore no one in the world contends with him.

Thus, the Ancients' saying, "If in humility you adapt yourself you will remain complete," was no empty precept.

For he alone attains completion who, yielding, returns home to the Tao.

Twist and get whole.

Bend and get straight.

Be empty and get filled.

Be worn and get renewed.

Have little: get much.

Have much: get baffled.

Therefore the sage

Holds to the One and

Becomes beneath-heaven's model.

He does not show himself,

Hence he shines.

Does not assert himself,

Hence he is seen.

Does not boast his merits,

Hence he survives.

Does not compete with anyone,

Hence no one beneath heaven

Can compete with him.

The old saying,

The twisted shall be made whole

Is it not true?

Be whole and you will return.

The yielding are preserved whole.

The crooked become straight.

The empty become filled.

The depleted are renewed.

What has little will gain.

What has much will become confused.

Therefore, one with a whole mind holds fast to the one essence and thereby becomes an example to the rest of the world.

Because he does not flaunt his brightness,

he becomes enlightened.

Because he is not self-important,

he becomes illustrious.

Because he does not boast of his accomplishments,

he becomes successful.

Because he is not self-assertive,

he becomes supreme.

Because he does not strive for superiority,

there is no one in the world who can contend with his superiority.

Indeed, the ancient teaching that "the yielding are preserved whole" is no empty saying.

Truly, they are preserved whole in order to attain one universal life.

XXII.

Abundance
Through Humility

Who is
deficient shall become complete,

He
who is bent and twisted shall be straight,

He
who is empty shall be filled again.

He
who is worn-out shall new strength obtain,

He
who has little then shall be supplied,

He
who has many things shall be denied.

Therefore
the sage holds fast in his embrace

The
Unity, and its example shows,

From
self-display is free, and therefore shines,

From
self-assertion, so distinguished grows,

From
self-praise free, his merit is confessed,

From
self-exalting, so will standing gain,

And
since he strives not, none with him can strive;

Therefore
the ancient sayings are not vain,

They
shall come home, and all complete remain.

That which is incomplete becomes complete.

The crooked becomes straight,

The empty becomes full,

The worn-out becomes new.

He who obtains has little,

He who scatters has much.

That is why the self-controlled man holds to Unity and brings it into manifestation for men.

He looks not at self, therefore he sees clearly;

He asserts not himself, therefore he shines;

He boasts not of self, therefore he has merit;

He glorifies not himself, therefore he endures.

The Master indeed does not strive, yet no one in the world can strive against him.

The words of the Ancients were not empty words:

"That which is incomplete becomes complete."

Acquire completeness by returning it.

Accept
and you will be whole.

Bend
and you will straighten.

Empty
and you will fill.

Grow
old and you will be renewed.

Have
little and you will gain.

Have
much and you will be confused.

The
Complete Thinker

embraces
the One,

Becomes
a Pattern to

all
under Heaven.

Does
not make a show,

Then
shines;

Does
not justify self,

Then
becomes known;

Does
not brag of ability,

Then
gets credit;

Does
not show success,

Then
lasts;

Does
not compete with anyone,

Then
no one can compete with the Complete Thinker.

Indeed,
the ancient saying:

"Accept
and you will remain whole"

is
no idle word.

Once
whole,

Turn
within and concentrate your Power.

The
world is as your home.

What is bowed, becomes whole.

What is crooked, becomes straight.

What is hollow, becomes filled.

What is worn, becomes new.

He, who has little, acquires.

He, who has much, is deluded.

Therefore the Saint clings to the One and makes it into the measure of All-under-heaven.

He does not display himself; therefore he shines.

He does not assert himself; therefore he is manifest.

He does not boast; therefore he succeeds.

He does not feel conceit; therefore he becomes chief.

Indeed, just because he does not strive, in All-under-heaven there is none that can strive with him.

The old saying: "what is bowed, become whole", is surely not an empty word? It implies all that is truly whole.

The partial becomes complete; the crooked, straight; the empty,

full; the worn out, new. He whose (desires) are few gets them; he

whose (desires) are many goes astray.

Therefore
the sage holds in his embrace the one thing (of

humility), and manifests it to all the world. He is free from self-

display, and therefore he shines; from self-assertion, and therefore

he is distinguished; from self-boasting, and therefore his merit is

acknowledged; from self-complacency, and therefore he acquires

superiority. It is because he is thus free from striving that

therefore no one in the world is able to strive with him.

That
saying of the ancients that 'the partial becomes complete' was

not vainly spoken:--all real completion is comprehended under it.

IF..
it
is bent, it will be kept intact;
if it is crooked, it will be straightened.

it
is sunken, it will be filled-up.
it
is worn-out, it will be renewed.
it
has little, it will gain more.
it
gets too much, it may get confused!
THEREFORE..

The
Sage remains in Unity,
and serves as the shepherd of all under Heaven.

Not being self-interested, one shines-forth;
not being an exhibitionist,
one is distinguished;
not being egotistical, one has merit;
not flattering
oneself, one may long endure.
Now,
simply because one is not competing, none will compete with you.
The old
saying about the flexible being preserved is right on the mark!
Truly,
one will be returned, intact.

Overcome
by giving up

See that you are really nil

Look into your emptiness

If you want to have your fill

Be
satisfied with little

Just content with what you need

If you are always wanting more

You surely are consumed by greed

Abide
in your simplicity

Though you are not on display

See all things are shining bright

In marvelous array

If
you do not boast or brag

Everyone will hold you high

If you do not argue

You will prevail thereby

Only
see you are complete

And all things have come to you

Overcome by giving up

All except your inner view

BEND and you will be whole.

Curl and you will be straight.

Keep empty and you will be filled.

Grow old and you will be renewed.

Have little and you will gain.

Have much and you will be confused.

Therefore, the Sage embraces the One,

And becomes a Pattern to all under Heaven.

He does not make a show of himself,

Hence he shines;

Does not justify himself,

Hence he becomes known;

Does not boast of his ability,

Hence he gets his credit;

Does not brandish his success,

Hence he endures;

Does not compete with anyone,

Hence no one can compete with him.

Indeed, the ancient saying: "Bend and you will remain whole" is no idle word.

Nay, if you have really attained wholeness, everything will flock to you.

Yield, and maintain integrity.

If you want to become whole; let yourself become partial.

If you want to become straight; let yourself become crooked.

If you want to become full; let yourself become empty.

If you want to be reborn; you must let yourself die.

If you want to be given everything; you must give everything up.

The sage accepts the world as the world accepts the Way.

He is free from self-display; and therefore he shines.

Freed from self-assertion; he is distinguished.

Removed from self-boasting; his merit is acknowledged.

removed from self-complacency; he acquires superiority.

It is because he is free from striving that

no one in the world is able to strive with him.

When the ancient Masters said,

"If you want to be given everything, give everything up,"

they weren't mouthing empty phrases.

Only in being lived by the Tao can you be truly complete.

If you want to become whole,

first let yourself become broken.

If you want to become straight,

first let yourself become twisted.

If you want to become full,

first let yourself become empty.

If you want to become new,

first let yourself become old.

Those whose desires are few get them,

those whose desires are great go astray.

For
this reason the Master embraces the Tao,

as an example for the world to follow.

Because she isn't self centered,

people can see the light in her.

Because she does not boast of herself,

she becomes a shining example.

Because she does not glorify herself,

she becomes a person of merit.

Because she wants nothing from the world,

the world can not overcome her.

When
the ancient Masters said,

"If you want to become whole,

then first let yourself be broken,"

they weren't using empty words.

All who do this will be made complete.

When I let go of what I am, I become what I might be. When I let go of what I have, I receive what I need.

These are feminine or Yin paradoxes:

- By yielding I endure.

- The empty space is filled.

- When I give of myself, I become more.

- When I feel most destroyed, I am about to grow.

- When I desire nothing, a great deal comes to me.

Have you ever struggles to get work or love and finally given up and found both love and work were suddenly there?

Do you want to be free and independent? Conform to God's law; that is how everything happens anyway.

When I give up trying to impress the group, I become very impressive. But when I am just trying to make myself look good, the group knows that and does not like it.

My best work is done when I forget my own point of view; the less I make of myself, the more I am.

When I yield to the wishes of the person working, I encounter no resistance.

This is the wisdom of the feminine: let go in order to achieve. The wise leader demonstrates this.

If you don"t want to be broken, bend.

If you want to be straight, allow some crookedness.

If you want to be filled, become empty.

If you want to be made new, let yourself be used.

If you want to be rich, desire little. Wanting more and more is craziness!

Therefore the sage embraces oneness

and becomes a mode for the world.

Not self-centered, she is enlightened.

Not self-righteous, she is a shining example.

Not self-glorifying, she accomplishes glorious things.

Not boastful, she grows large inside.

She alone does not compete,

And so the world can never overcome her.

When the ancients said, "If you don't want to be broken, bend"

Were they just uttering empty words?

Bend sincerely and wholeness will return to you.

If
you accept all things by refusing to distinguish

good and bad,

you overcome the confusion of the physical

reality

and live in harmony with the Infinite

manifestations.

If
you bend as you are impacted by manifestations,

your path of peace and harmony

will remain straight and true.

If
you empty your mind of knowledge,

you will fill with the experience

of oneness with the Infinite.

All
manifestations constantly disintegrate and

remanifest.

As your body wears out, your spirit is

reborn.

Possess
little in goods and thoughts and

maintain your vision of oneness with

Infinity.

Possess
much and become lost in the confusion

that the physical reality is the true reality.

Therefore,
remain focused on the oneness of

Infinity

and become a beacon for all beings.

Do
not distinguish the self

and manifest the oneness of Infinity for all

to see.

Do
not assert the self and others will follow.

Do
not bolster the self and other will give their

respect.

Do
not allow the self to brag

and others will bestow their praise.

Do
not allow the self to be quarrelsome

and experience peace with all beings.

Is
not it true that if you accept all things

by refusing to distinguish good and bad,

you overcome the confusion of the physical

reality and live in harmony with

the Infinite manifestations?

Flow
with the peace and harmony of the oneness

of Infinity and experience immortality.

Yield to be Whole. Bend to be Straight.

Keep low to be Full. Wear out to Renew.

Having little allows gain. Having much causes confusion.

Thus does the wise man embrace the One, and is a model under Heaven.

Not self-centered, and therefore discerning.

Not self-absorbed, and therefore distinguished.

Not boastful, and therefore effective.

Not proud, and therefore fit for leadership.

Because he avoids disputes, he avoids worldly conflict.

Hence the old saying 'Yield to be whole'.

How else can Emptiness speak ?

Indeed, keep whole and complete.

That which yields will be preserved.

That which bends will be straight.

That which is empty will be filled.

That which wears out will be renewed.

He who has little will gain more.

He who has much will be perplexed.

Therefore the Sage embraces the oneness of the Tao,

And sets an example to everyone.

He does not make a great show, therefore he shines out.

He does not try to justify himself, and so he is distinguished.

He does not boast, so receives merit.

He is not arrogant, and so endures.

Because he does not compete, no one under Heaven can compete with him.

When the ancients said, 'Yield and be preserved,' was that an empty saying?

Attain completeness, and all things will come to you.

What is adaptable can remain whole.

What is bendable can be straight.

What is empty can be replenished.

What is used can be renewed.

One is satisfied when one gets barely enough.

One is overburdened when one gets too much.

Therefore,

The wise keeps the humblest life style

As a basic model for the world.

Unoccupied with one's own views, one is objective.

Unoccupied with one's own merits, one is recommended.

Unoccupied with one's own deeds, one is successful.

Unoccupied with one's own superiority, one is obeyed.

One gets the most if one gets nothing for one's self.

The old saying about flexibility holds true.

One sticks to it heart and soul, and it will work.

"Bent - then mature." Compromised - then upright Empty - then solid old and spent - then young and sprightly. A little - then a gain a lot - then confusing.

And so the Wise Person: Embraces The One Thing, and becomes the Shepherd of the World.

He does not show off, so he shines he does not promote himself, so he becomes famous he does not boast of himself, so he gets the credit he does not glorify himself, so he becomes leader.

He just does not contend and so no one can contend with him.

What the ancients said: "bent - then mature," is this an empty saying? This is true maturity, turn back to it.

Being satisfied with little, you can gain much. Seeking much you will go astray. The wise heeds this precept. If it could be so with all people!

The wise trusts not only to his physical eyes — thus he can see clearly.

The wise does not think that only he is right —thus he knows the truth.

He does not seek glory — yet people respect him.

He does not seek power — yet people follow him.

He does not struggle with anyone — thus no one can vanquish him.

He does not feel pity for himself — thus he can successfully develop.

Only he who does not seek to be ahead of others is capable of living in harmony with everyone.

The wise cares about everyone, and he becomes an example to all.

He does not praise himself — yet he is respectable.

He does not elevate himself — yet he is esteemed by others.

In ancient times, people said that imperfect moves to becoming perfect. Are these words vain? No! Truly, by gaining Unity you come to Perfection!

What is low can rise.

What is twisted could be straightened.

What is empty attracts the full.

The end will generate a beginning.

He who has little will have a lot

He who has a lot will loose.

The
Wise Person is on the Tao Way,

Like an example to follow.

He has no pride thus he shines,

He doesn't put himself in front thus pay attention,

He doesn't praise himself thus he has merit.

He doesn't want to lead thus he is appreciated.

He isn't in competition with anyone.

Thus no one wants his place.

From
the old time is said to be humble,

Thus integrity will be maintained.

The humble one is on the Tao Way.

"Crumpled
then whole, twisted then straight, sunken-in then full, tattered then new, having
little then acquiring much, having much then being made deluded''---for these
reasons, the Sage embraces the One to become the standard for the world. He
does not show himself off and so is luminous. He does not justify himself and
so is illustrious. He does not boast of himself and so has merit. He does not
brag on himself and so is senior to the rest. For only by his not being contentious
does it happen that none in the world can contend with him. How could it have
been empty words when the ancients said: "Crumpled then whole?'' Verily such
a one shall return whole to his source.

To yield is to have the whole.

To be crooked is to be straightened.

To be hollow is to be filled.

To be worn out is to be renewed.

To have a little is to get more.

To have a lot is to be confused.

Therefore the Sage sets an example for the world

By embracing the One.

By not insisting on his view, he may become enlightened.

By not being self-righteous, he may become illustrious.

By not boasting, he may receive credit.

By not being arrogant, he may last long.

And just because he does not compete, the entire world cannot compete with him.

The Ancients say: "to yield is to have the whole."

Are these merely words?

Truly the whole will return to him.

Following the Pattern

What is curved becomes whole;

What is crooked becomes straight.

What is deep becomes filled;

What is exhausted becomes refreshed.

What is small becomes attainable;

What is excessive becomes confused.

Thus Evolved Individuals hold to the One

And regard the world as their Pattern.

They do not display themselves;

Therefore they are illuminated.

They do not define themselves;

Therefore they are distinguished.

They do not make claims;

Therefore they are credited.

They do not boast;

Therefore tehy advance.

Since, indeed, they do not compete,

The world cannot compete with them.

That ancient saying: "What is curved becomes whole" -

Are these empty words?

To become whole,

Turn within.

The ancients used to say, "The one who yields becomes whole." In giving up everything, you gain everything. In emptying your mind, it becomes full. In becoming partial you become whole. Teach by acting, not by lecture. Be like the un-carved block. Do not contend or defend. Then people will see themselves in you. Do your work each day then rest.

The crooked shall be made straight

And the rough places plain;

The pools shall be filled

And the worn renewed;

The needy shall receive

And the rich shall be perplexed.

So
the Wise Man cherishes the One,

As a standard to the world:

Not displaying himself,

He is famous;

Not asserting himself,

He is distinguished;

Not boasting his powers,

He is effective;

Taking no pride in himself,

He is chief.

Because
he is no competitor,

No one in all the world

can compete with him.

The
saying of the men of old

Is not in vain:

"The crooked shall be made straight-"

To be perfect, return to it.

To yield is yet to be preserved wholly,

To be bent is yet to become straight,

To be hollow is yet to be filled up,

To be worn out is yet to be renewed,

To have little (knowledge) is yet to gain,

To have much (knowledge) is yet to be perplexed.

There the sage takes Tao (the One) as the instrument to observe destiny under Heaven.

He does not merely rely on his own eyes,

Therefore he is wise and penetrating;

He does not consider himself always in the right,

Therefore he is able to tell right from wrong;

He does not boast of himself,

Therefore he is given credit;

He does not think himself superior,

Therefore he is qualified for leadership.

It is precisely because he does not compete that nobody under Heaven could compete with him.

How could such old sayings be false as "to yield is yet to be preserved wholly"?

Truly they will preserve people well.

Stepping aside keeps one's wholeness intact.

Bending makes one straight.

Being empty makes one full.

Being worn out keeps one new.

Having little gives one access.

Having much leads one astray.

In this way, the sage embraces the One and becomes a model for all under Heaven.

He does not flaunt himself, thus he shines.

He does not insist that he is right, thus his rightness is manifest.

He does not boast about himself, thus his merit is acknowledged.

He avoids self-importance, thus he long endures.

It is because he does not contend that none among all under Heaven can contend with him.

As the ancient saying has it, "Stepping aside keeps one's wholeness intact."

How could this ever be an empty saying!

Truly, such a one will revert to it [nonexistence] with his wholeness intact.

1. Bent over, you'll be preserved whole;

2. When twisted, you'll be upright;

3. When hollowed out, you'll be full;

4. When worn out, you'll be renewed;

5. When you have little, you'll attain [much];

6. With much, you'll be confused.

7.
Therefore the Sage holds on to the One and in this way becomes the shepherd
of the world.

8. He does not show himself off; therefore he becomes prominent.

9. He does not put himself on display; therefore he brightly shines.

10. He does not brag about himself; therefore he receives credit.

11. He does not praise his own deeds; therefore he can long endure.

12.
It is only because he does not compete that, therefore, no one is able to compete
with him.

13. The so-called "Bent over you'll be preserved whole" of the ancients

14. Was an expression that was really close to it!

15. Truly "wholeness" will belong to him.

Learn how to
stand still if you want to go places.

Learn how to kneel if you want to stand tall.

If you want wisdom, empty your mind.

If you want the world, renounce your riches.

Push yourself until you're exhausted,

and then you'll find your strength.

You can go far
if you don't have anything to carry.

The more you acquire, the less you can really see.

A Master takes
this to heart

and sets an example for everybody else.

She's not showing off

so people take notice.

She's not out to prove anything

so people take her at her word.

She doesn't brag about himself

but people know what she's done.

She hasn't got an agenda

but people know what she can do.

She's not out to get anybody

which is why nobody can get in her way.

"Learn
how to stand still if you want to go places."

That's not as crazy as it sounds.

Get in touch with Tao, and you'll see what I mean.

.

Yielding for Unity

To yield is to preserve unity.

To bend is to become straight.

To empty oneself is to become full.

To wear oneself out is to be renewed.

To have little is to be content.

To have abundance is to be troubled.

Therefore the wise embrace the One

and become examples for the world.

They do not display themselves and are therefore illumined.

They do not justify themselves and are distinguished.

They do not make claims and are therefore given credit.

They do not seek glory and therefore are leaders.

Because they do not compete,

the world cannot compete with them.

Is not the ancient saying true,

"To yield is to preserve unity?"

for true wholeness comes from turning within.

He who surrenders attains completion.

He who bends will endure.

He who empties himself finds fullness.

He who sacrifices himself is renewed.

He who desires nothing attains everything.

He who still craves attains nothing.

Likewise the Awakened Man:

By losing his identity in Tao he becomes a model for the world.

Because he does not try to shine he illumines.

Because he disregards himself he is highly regarded.

Because he wants nothing for himself he is successful.

Because he does not make much of himself he has power.

Because he does not resist nothing resists him.

Not vain talk is the wisdom of the ancients:

"One who surrenders attains completion."

The Awakened Man fulfills it.

Futility of Contention

Lao Tze says,

Be bendable, you will assure wholeness.

Be wronged, you will be proven right.

Be empty, you will be filled.

Be worn out, you will be renewed.

The scanty deserves to gain.

The superfluous becomes lost.

Thus the sage insists on recommending the true one for the world to model after.

A man sees clearly, because he doesn't claim self-righteousness.

A man gets credit because he doesn't boast his merit.

A man has longevity because he doesn't claim importance.

Therefore I say that whosoever gives up a contest, there will be no one who can compete with him.

The ancient epigram goes like this:

Be bendable, you will assure the wholeness.

Is this an airy saying?

Actually, this saying has already preserved many men.

YIELDING TO MAINTAIN INTEGRITY

Yield,
and maintain integrity.

To bend is to be upright;

to be empty is to be full.

Those
who have little have much to gain,

but those who have much

may be confused by possessions.

The
wise man embraces the all encompassing;

he is unaware of himself, and so has brilliance;

not defending himself, he gains distinction;

not seeking fame, he receives recognition;

not making false claims, he does not falter;

and not being quarrelsome,

is in conflict with no one.

This
is why it was said by the sages of old,

"Yield, and maintain integrity;

be whole, and all things come to you".

If you want to become whole,

let yourself be partial.

If you want to become straight,

let yourself be crooked.

If you want to become full,

let yourself be empty.

If you want to be reborn,

let yourself die.

If you want to be given everything,

give everything up.

The Master, by residing in the Tao,

sets an example for all beings.

Because he doesn't display himself,

people can see his light.

Because he has nothing to prove,

people can trust his words.

Because he doesn't know who he is,

people recognize themselves in him.

Because he has no goal in mind,

everything he does succeeds.

When the ancient Masters said,

"If you want to be given everything, give everything up,"

they weren't using empty phrases.

Only in being lived by the Tao can you be truly yourself.

Through tolerance can perfection be attained.

By "indirect way" can "direct way" be reached.

Through lowness can highness be maintained.

Through old fashion can new fashion be created.

By "have less" can "have more" be possible.

By having plenty only confusion will result.

Hence one who does not show off is enlightened.

One who does not boast of himself has merit.

One who does not claim credit for himself is popular.

One who does not brandish his success thus leads all.

Because of non-struggle, therefore there is nothing under heaven which can struggle with him.

The ancient saying:

"Through tolerance can perfection be attained."

Is it an empty talk?

Thus, if one attains perfection everything under heaven will follow him.

Yield, and retain integrity.

In the depths of whirling, there is stillness.

The hollow enables the plentiful.

The old gives way to the new.

The small allows for increase.

Excess breeds confusion.

Therefore the sage holds oneness as the shepherd of the world.

He who does not display himself is seen.

He who does not justify himself is understood.

He who does not lash out succeeds.

He who does not build himself up endures.

Therefore,

Only the spirit of noncompetition makes things noncompetitive.

So the old saying, "yield, and retain integrity," is but a few words,

But when rightly understood, integrity returns.

XXII

Learn
to bend, and you will never break

Learn to turn, and you will never fall

Empty yourself, and you'll be filled

Release yourself, and you'll be renewed

Own little, you can accomplish much

Own much, you will be bewildered by your choices

The
taoist holds to the simple way and guides the world

Being reserved, he becomes noted

Being subtle, he shines

Being quiet, he is acknowledged

Being humble, he is long remembered

Because
he does not compete, no one can overcome him

'Bend and you will never break'

Surely this phrase has merit

Who practices it will be whole, always

Be Tactful and You Remain Whole

Be tactful and you remain whole;

bend and you remain straight.

The hollow is filled,

the old is renewed.

Economy is gain,

excess is confusion.

Therefore sages embrace unity

as a model for the world.

Not seeing themselves,

they are therefore clear.

Not asserting themselves,

they are therefore outstanding.

Not congratulating themselves,

they are therefore meritorious.

Not taking pride in themselves,

they last long.

It is just because they do not contend

that no one in the world can contend with them.

Is it empty talk, the old saying

that tact keeps you whole?

When truthfulness is complete,

it still resorts to this.

Malleability preserves entirety.

Mistakes teach lessons.

Empty containers can be filled.

Breakages cause replacement.

Less makes success.

Much leads to confusion.

Thus the sage believes Tao is the only law of the universe.

He does not brag himself so he can be held in great respect.

He does not assume he is always right so he can be unbiased.

He does not exaggerate so he can be right.

He is not vainglorious so he can keep making progress.

If you do not compete, then no one can compete with you in the world.

So how can the old saying, such as 'Malleability preserves entirety', be not without truth?

They all return to Tao.

Bent but then whole.

Curled but then straight.

Empty but then full.

Worn but then new.

Little but then gain.

Much but then doubtful.

Therefore, the sage embraces the One, and becomes an example for the world.

He does not make a show of himself, hence he shines.

He does not justify himself, hence he becomes known.

He does not boast of his ability, hence he gets his credit.

He does not brandish his success, hence he endures.

He does not compete with anyone, hence no one can compete with him.

Indeed, the ancient saying "Bent but then whole" is not an empty word.

If you have really attained wholeness, everyone will flock to you.

Yield, thus preserve.

Can be bent, can then be straightened.

Being hollow, can then be filled.

Shedding makes new.

Being little, can then have room to grow.

Too much, easily be confused.

Therefore, sages embrace the one, as an example to all.

Not putting on a display, thus are seen.

Not justifying themselves, thus are distinguished.

Not boasting, thus receive recognition.

Not bragging, thus never falter.

Not seeking for all the above,

so, no one can compete with them.

The ancients say, "Yield thus preserve," are not empty words.

Be preserving, all things will come to you.

Yield and overcome;

bend and be straight.

Empty out and be full;

wear out and be renewed.

Have little and gain;

have much and be confused.

Therefore,
the True Person embraces the One

and becorrles a model for all.

Do
not look only at yourself,

and you will see much.

Do not justify yourself,

and you will be distinguished.

Do not brag,

and you will have merit.

Do not be prideful,

and your work will endure.

It
is because you do not strive

that no one under heaven can strive with you.

The
saying of the Old Ones, "Yield and Overcome,"

is not an empty phrase.

True wholeness is achieved

by blending with life.

Be
less to become more

become broken to remain whole

bend like the grass to stand tall

be empty to receive

be used to become new

have little to gain more.

Those who have much

will not understand.

Wise persons

hold fast to the natural ways

as a standard for use by all.

Reclusive, yet known by all

unassertive, yet respected by all

modest, yet praised by all

ambitionless, yet followed by all.

Do
not argue

and no one will argue with you.

These
sayings,

"To remain whole, be twisted," or

"Yield and overcome," or

"Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,"

are not idle words.

It is the way of the earth.

"To remain whole, yield somewhat or seem curved and bent if you may."

To become straight, let yourself look bent.

To become full, seem hollow.

Seem tattered now, that you can be renewed.

Those that have little, can get more,

To have plenty is to be confused..

Therefore the wise man clasps the primal unity, testing by it everything under
heaven by himself - it.

He doesn't show himself much, he is therefore luminous and clear.

He doesn't define himself, therefore he is distinct.

He doesn't boast, therefore people give him credit: he succeeds by that.

He's never outright proud of his work, and therefore it endures.

Because he doesn't contend, none in the world can contend with him.

So the old saying To remain whole, seem twisted!" was no idle word;

for true wholeness can only be won by return to dao.

If it

Is bent, it will be preserved intact;

Is crooked, it will be straightened;

Is sunken, it will be filled;

Is worn-out, it will be renewed;

Has little, it will gain;

Has much, it will be confused.

For these reasons,

The sage holds on to unity and serves as the shepherd of all under heaven.

He is not self-absorbed, therefore he shines forth;

He is not self-revealing, therefore he is distinguished;

He is not self-assertive, therefore he has merit;

He does not praise himself, therefore he is long-lasting.

Now,

Simply because he does not compete,

No one can compete with him.

The old saying about the bent being preserved intact is indeed close to the mark!

Truly, he shall be returned intact.

Whosoever adapteth himself shall be preserved to the end.

Whosoever bendeth himself shall be straightened.

Whosoever emptieth himself shall be filled.

Whosoever weareth himself away shall be renewed.

Whosoever humbleth himself shall be exalted.

Whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased.

Therefore doth the Sage cling to simplicity, and is an example to all men.

He is not onstentatious, and therefore he shines.

He is not egotistic, and therefore he is praised.

He is not vain, therefore he is esteemed.

He is not haughty, and therefore he is honoured.

And because he does not compete with others, no man is his enemy.

The ancient maxim, "Whosoever adapteth himself shall be preserved to the end," verily it is no idle saying.

Without doubt he shall go back to his Home in peace.

Relationship Paradoxes

Paradoxes abound in love

and they must be fully lived.

Being wounded is the only way to healing.

Being at fault is the only path to forgiveness.

Feeling empty allows for satisfaction.

Longing for another brings passion's fulfillment.

Paradoxes cannot be solved

as problems are solved.

They can only be accepted

and cherished.

Are the current issues in your relationship

problems,

or paradoxes?

To yield is to be preserved whole. To be bent is to become straight.
To be empty is to be full. To be worn out is to be renewed. To have
little is to possess. To have plenty is to be perplexed.

Therefore the sage embraces the One And becomes the model of the world.

He does not justify himself; therefore he becomes prominent. He does
not boast of himself; therefore he is given credit. He does not brag;
therefore he can endure for long.

It is precisely because he does not compete that the world cannot compete with him.

Is the ancient saying, "To yield is to be preserved whole," empty
words? Truly he will be preserved and (prominence and credit) will come
to him.

'Yield and you
need not break:'

Bent you can straighten,

Emptied you can hold,

Torn you can mend;

And as want can reward you

So wealth can bewilder.

Aware of this, a wise man has the simple return

Which other men seek:

Without inflaming himself

He is kindled,

Without explaining himself

Is explained,

Without taking credit

Is accredited,

Laying no claim

Is acclaimed

And, because he does not compete,

Finds peaceful competence.

How true is the old saying,

'Yield and you need not break'!

How completely it comes home!

If you can bear unfairness, you can make yourself a complete person.

If you can bear overbending, you can be straightened out.

If you can bear the old, you can gain the new.

When you have too little, you will gain;

When you have too much, you will lose.

Therefore, the great men kept the DAO and made themselves the models for the world.

They were not stubborn, so they knew the right and the wrong.

They were not narrow-minded, so everyone accepted their opinions.

They did not show off, so everyone recognized their accomplishments.

They were not conceited, so they were able to lead the people.

Only because they did not fight for the credit, was no one able to claim it.

Is the old saying "bearing the unfairness makes you a complete man" an empty joke?

No, because it is completely consistent with the DAO.

To yield is to prevail;

To bend is to straighten;

To be hollow is to be full;

To die is to regenerate.

To have little is to receive much;

To have much is to be confused.

Wherefore,

The sage embraces the complementary oneness of existence,

And sets an exemplary pattern for the rest of the world.

He does not display his ability,

Therefore his being shines forth.

He is not self-righteous,

Therefore he becomes distinguished.

He does not take credit,

Therefore he becomes recognized.

He is not self-important,

Therefore he is made a leader.

He does not contend with the world,

Therefore the world does not contend with him.

The old admonition that "to yield is to prevail" is not an empty adage.

Truly, to yield is to prevail, and in prevailing, one returns to oneness.

What is adaptable can remain whole.

What is bendable can be straight.

What is empty can be replenished.

What is used can be renewed.

One is satisfied when one gets barely enough.

One is overburdened when one gets too much.

Therefore,

The wise keeps the humblest life style

As a basic model for the world.

Unoccupied with one's own views, one is objective.

Unoccupied with one's own merits, one is recommended.

Unoccupied with one's own deeds, one is successful.

Unoccupied with one's own superiority, one is obeyed.

One gets the most if one gets nothing for one's self.

The old saying about flexibility holds true.

One sticks to it heart and soul, and it will work.

Yield, and maintain integrity.

If you want to become whole; let yourself become partial.

If you want to become straight; let yourself become crooked.

If you want to become full; let yourself become empty.

If you want to be reborn; you must let yourself die.

If you want to be given everything; you must give everything up.

The sage accepts the world as the world accepts the Way.

He is free from self-display; and therefore he shines.

Freed from self-assertion; he is distinguished.

Removed from self-boasting; his merit is acknowledged.

removed from self-complacency; he acquires superiority.

It is because he is free from striving that

no one in the world is able to strive with him.

When the ancient Masters said,

"If you want to be given everything, give everything up,"

they weren't mouthing empty phrases.

Only in being lived by the Tao can you be truly complete.

