===== Chapter 25 =====

There was a thing disordered but complete

Before Heaven and Earth were born.

Tranquil... empty... alone standing unchanging.

Swirling and not tiring.

It can be considered as being to the world a mother.

I do not know its name.

Forced to verbalize it, I call it "Tao."

Forced to describe it, I call it "Great."

Great, it is said to leave.

Leaving, it is said to be distant.

Distant, it is said to return.

Therefore, the Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

The Earth is great.

Humankind is also great.

In the middle realm, there are four greatnesses

And humankind then dwells in this Completeness:

Humankind is ruled by the Earth

The Earth is ruled by Heaven

Heaven is ruled by the Tao

The Tao is ruled by its own nature.

Something unformed and complete Before heaven and Earth were born,
Solitary and silent, Stands alone and unchanging. Pervading all things
without limit. It is like the mother of all things under heaven,

But I don't know its name - Better call it Tao. Better call it great.

Great means passing on. Passing on means going far. Going far means returning.

Therefore Tao is great, And heaven, And earth, And humans. Four great things in the world. Aren't humans one of them?

Humans follow earth Earth follows heaven Heaven follows Tao. Tao follows its own nature.

There is something, complete and embracing all,

Born before heaven and earth took form,

Soundless and void,

Standing alone, unchanging,

Moving ahead, unceasing.

It seems to be the mother of the universe.

I do not know its name so I call it Tao.

Compelled to give it a name, I would call it Great.

Being great, it reaches far.

Reaching far, it flows everywhere.

Flowing everywhere, it returns to its source.

Indeed, Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

Mankind is great, too.

These four are great in the universe

And mankind is one of them.

Mankind follows the rules of the earth.

The earth follows the rules of heaven.

Heaven follows the rules of Tao.

Tao follows its own rules, too.

OF HUMANITY, HEAVEN, EARTH AND TAO

Being formless, yet mysteriously complete:

- Existing for all time.

- Silent without substance.

- Standing alone, changing not.

- Pervading all and unfailing.

- Regarded as the Mother of all there is.

Not having a name, I call it the Tao.

If needing to identify its nature by granting it a name,

Call it "The Great".

Being great it flows, extending itself endlessly.

Thus flowing, it is called far-reaching.

Being far-reaching, it ultimately returns

whence it started.

Accordingly,

Just as Tao is great - the ultimate essence,

So, heaven is great - the creative essence, Clear and pure.

Earth is great - the receptive essence, Massive and stable.

Humanity is great - the harmonious essence,

Intelligent and sensitive.

Note then, that humanity is one of the four great essences.

While humanity is conditioned by earthly essence,

And earth is conditioned by heavenly essence,

And heaven is conditioned by the essence of Tao,

The Tao, conforms to its own nature.

The substance that arose from the chaos is whole.

Before Heaven and Earth were born there was stillness! Formlessness!

Alone, poised, not yet changed.

Then it went out everywhere unhindered.

It then became Heaven below's (the sacred body's) mother.

We still know it by the name of the one.

The philosopher, they speak of the Tao.

Forced to create a name, I name it the great.

The great is called far reaching.

Far reaching, it is known to go far away.

Far away, it is known to return.

Thus the Tao is great, Heaven is great, Earth is great, the nobility of humanity is great.

Within the universe there exist four great directions and the nobility of humanity dwells there in the unity of the one.

Humanity emulates the Earth, the Earth emulates the Heavens, the Heavens emulate the Tao, and the Tao emulates itself.

IMAGES OF THE MYSTERY

Without Limit and Perfect, there is a Becoming, beyond Heaven and Earth.

It hath nor motion nor Form; it is alone, it changeth not; it extendeth

all ways; it hath no Adversary. It is like the All-Mother.

I
know not its Name, but I call it the Tao. Moreover, I exert myself,

and call it Vastness.

Vastness,
the Becoming! Becoming, it flieth afar. Afar, it draweth

near. Vast is this Tao; Heaven also is Vast; Earth is vast; and the Holy

King is vast also. In the Universe are Four Vastnesses, and of these is

the Holy King.

Man
followeth the formula of Earth; Earth followeth that of Heaven, and

Heaven that of the Tao. The formula of the Tao is its own Nature.

There is a Being of Perfection, incomprehensible. It ever was, stilland formless, before they came, stars and earth. Unchangeable and alone,unencumbered, whirling thru Time. I name it, Creative Nature. It has noname, shall I call it Tao, the Spirit? Or the substance, the infinite?The infinite in unlimited attributes? The great Distant, that forever returns!Tao is great, the Heavens are great. The Universe is great. May the rulerbe in tune with the Spirit. Four things are great in the world, May theruler be one of them. Man is under the law of the earth, the earth underthe law of the Universe, The universe under the law of Tao and Tao is theLaw itself.

Before Creation revealed itself

There was already something, perfect but formless

Quiet and unchanging

Ubiquitous and inexhaustible

People might consider it as the creating force of everything that is

I cannot describe it, but I just call it Tao

If I have to interpret it , I would name it "The Universe"

With that Universe I mean that which extends itself everywhere

The infinitely extending and returning

Therefore the creative is great and the creation great and so is a wise man

So there is a trinity of greatnesses and one of them is the true human being

A true human being follows his nature, nature and all its eternally unchanging laws

The laws of nature are the eternal order of the Universe

The order of the Universe is well-founded by the Unnameable

There exists something which is prior to all beginnings and endings, Which, unmoved and unmanifest, itself neither begins nor ends. All-pervasive and inexhaustible, it is the perpetual source of everything else,

For want of a better name, I call it Nature. If I am forced to describe it, I speak of it as "ultimate reality."

Ultimate reality involves initiation of growth, initiation of growth involves completion of growth, and completion of growth involves returning to that whence it came.

Nature is ultimate, the principle of initiating is ultimate, and the principle of perfecting is ultimate. And the intelligent person is also ultimate. Four kinds of ultimate, then, exist, and the intelligent man is one of them.

Man devotes himself to satisfying his desires, fulfilling his purposes, realizing his ideals, or achieving his goals. But goals are derived from aims. And all aiming is Nature's aiming, and is Nature's way of being itself.

There was something formless yet complete,

That existed before heaven and earth;

Without sound, without substance,

Dependent on nothing, unchanging,

All pervading, unfailing.

One may think of it as the mother of all things under heaven.

Its true name we do not know;

Were I forced to say to what class of things it belongs

I should call it Great (ta)

Now ta also means passing on,

And passing on means going Far Away,

And going far away means returning.

Thus just as Tao has "this greatness" and as earth has it and as heaven has it,

So may the ruler also have it.

Thus "within the realm there are four portions of greatness",

And one belongs to the king.

The ways of men are conditioned by those of earth.

The ways of earth, by those of heaven.

The ways of heaven by those of Tao, and the ways of Tao by the Self-so.

Formless no-thing.

Precedent of heaven and earth.

Timeless, unchanging, solitary, silent.

It is the mother of the ten thousand things.

I do not know its name.

I call it Tao.

If forced to describe it,

I call it great.

Great implies vast reaches.

Vast reaches implies far away.

Far away implies return.

Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

Man, too, is great.

In the realm there are four greats,

and a noble man is one.

Man follows the way of earth.

Earth follows the way of heaven.

Heaven follows the way of Tao.

Tao is the great Way.

There was something in chaos (yet) complete

Before heaven & earth came to be

So silent, so remote

Standing alone without change

Acting everywhere and without limit

(It) may be regarded as mother to (all) under heaven

We do not know its name

A word for it speaks of a path

(If) pressed to develop its name speak of greatness

Greatness tells of journeying on

Journeying on tells of the far beyond

The far beyond tells of coming back

In this way the way is great

Heaven is great, earth is great

And sovereignty, too, is great

Between the horizons are four (kinds of) greatness

And sovereignty has its place as one among these

Humanity takes the earth as law

The earth takes heaven as law

Heaven takes the way as law

The way takes its own nature as law

Four infinities

There was something mysteriously formed out of chaos,

That was born before Heaven and Earth.

Quiet en still! Pure and deep!

It stands alone on its own and does not change.

It can be regarded as the mother of Heaven and Earth.

I do not yet know its name.

I style it "The Way".

For lack of a better word, I call it great.

Being great, it flows, it flows far away.

Having gone far, it returns.

Tao is great;

Heaven is great;

Earth is great;

And the king is also great."

These are the four great powers

And the king occupies one place among them.

Man models himself to the Earth.

Earth models itself on Heaven.

Heaven models itself on the Tao.

Tao models itself on what is natural.

Something mysterious and perfect existed before even heaven and earth were born. Silent, immeasurable, standing alone and unchanging, moving without end or exhaustion, it is the mother of the known and unknown universe.

I don't know its name, so I call it by an alias: Tao. Forced to describe it, I only say, "It is great."

That which is great continues. That which continues goes far. That which goes far returns.

Therefore Tao is great, heaven is great, earth is great, a person of Tao is great. These are the four greatnesses in the universe.

A person of Tao follows earth. Earth follows Heaven. Heaven follows Tao. Tao follows its own nature.

There is something whole and formless,

That existed before any universe was born.

It makes no sound,

Has no substance,

Can't be fixed in time or space-

It is inexhaustible, unchanging, perduring:

It is the uterus of being,

And I call it Tao,

Just so it has a home in my mind.

It may also be called the great,

Since all beings arise from it,

And it is the home to which they return.

Nature is great;

The sky is great;

The earth is great;

Even humans can be great.

These four great presences

Are not to be separated-

They work correctly only as One.

Humans: honor the earth-

As the earth loves its sky,

As the sky reflects its Tao,

And as the Tao moves in harmony

With its own eternal Consciousness.

It should be clear to the reader by now that Lao Tzu is not a religious man: not in the sense of adhering to an ideology of faith. His teaching is of a simple yet surpassing naturalism, based on inner experience rather than on belief, doctrine, or some holy writ. Yet here, he has written a kind of hymn to the Cosmos, a beautiful plainsong to honor the Inexpressible. As he does elsewhere in the Tao Te Ching, he resorts to feminine metaphor to describe the nature of Tao, calling it "the uterus of being."

This poem is a celebration in verse of a deeply moving inner experience; the gratitude of the writer can be felt, reaching out of the page and toward its Cosmic Origin. Readers familiar with the work of Walt Whitman may find this mood of lyric celebration particularly resonant with that poet's "Song of Myself."

There is something mysterious,

without beginning, without end,

that existed before the heavens and earth.

Unmoving; infinite; standing alone; never changing.

It is everywhere and it is inexhaustible.

It is the mother of all.

I
do not know its name.

If I must name it I call it Tao

and I hail it as supreme.

Supreme
means never-ending;

never-ending means far-reaching;

and far-reaching means returning.

Thus Tao is supreme, the heavens are supreme,

earth is supreme, and man is supreme.

There are four supremes in the universe;

man is one of them.

Man
is subject to the laws of the earth,

the earth is subject to the laws of the universe,

the universe is subject to the laws of Tao,

and Tao is subject to the laws of its own nature.

There was a completed, amorphous something before the Heaven-Earth was born. Tranquil! Boundless!

Abiding alone and changing not! Extending everywhere without risk. It may be styled "the world-mother."

I do not know its name, but characterize it – tae Tao. Arbitrarily forcing a name upon it I call it the Great.

Great, it may be said to be transitory. Transitory, it become remote. Remote, it returns.

The Tao, then, is great; Heaven is great; Earth is Great; a king is also great. In space there are four that are great, and the king dwells there as one of them.

Man's standard is the earth. Earth's standard is the Heaven. Heaven's standard is the Tao. The Tao's standard is spontaneity.

There is a thing inherent and natural, Which existed before heaven and earth. Motionless and fathomless, It stands alone - and never changes; It pervades everywhere and never becomes exhausted. It may be regarded as the Mother of the Universe.

I do not know its name. If I am forced to give it a name, I call it Tao, and I name it as supreme.

Supreme means going on; Going on means going far; Going far means returning.

Therefore Tao is supreme; heaven is supreme; earth is supreme; and man is also supreme; There are in the universe four things supreme, and man is one of them.

Man follows the laws of earth; Earth follows the laws of heaven; Heaven follows the laws of Tao; Tao follows the laws of its intrinsic nature.

What's behind it all?

There is a thing-kind made up of a mix.

It emerges before the cosmos.

Solitary! Inchoate!

Self grounded and unchanging.

Permeating all processes without extremity.

We can deem it the mother of the social world.

I don't know its name. When put in characters we say dao.

Forced to deem it as named, we say 'great.'

Being great, we say 'comprehensive.'

Being comprehensive, we say 'far reaching.'

Being far reaching, we say 'reverting.'

So our dao is great;

Nature (heaven) is great,

Earth is great,

and kings are also great.

Within a region are four 'greats.'

And the King occupies one of those [lofty] statuses.

Humans treat earth as a standard.

Earth treats constant nature as a standard.

Constant nature treats dao as a standard.

Dao treats being so of itself as a standard.

There was a thing, a "gathering" chaos,

Which existed prior to heaven and earth.

Silent!

Empty!

Existing by itself, unchanging,

Pervading everywhere, inexhaustible,

It might be called the mother of the world.

Its name is unknown;

I simply call it Tao.

If I were to exert myself to define it,

I might call it great.

Great means extending to the limitless.

Extending to the limitless means reaching the extreme distance.

Reaching the extreme distance means returning to "nearness."

Thus, Tao is great,

Heaven is great, earth is great, and man is great, too.

In the universe we have four greatnesses, and man is but one.

Man is in accordance with earth.

Earth is in accordance with heaven.

Heaven is in accordance with Tao.

Tao is in accordance with that which is.

There is matter formed of confusion, born earlier than Heaven and Earth.

In the silence and the void it stands alone and does not change.

It turns around without worry.

It is capable of being the mother of all creatures under Heaven.

I do not know its name, but call it Tao.

It is compelled to be named 'great'.

'Great' means passing away,

passing away means far away,

far away means returning.

That is why the Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

The emperor is great.

Within the realm there are four great things; the emperor is one of the four.

Human beings follow the Earth.

The Earth follows Heaven.

Heaven follows the Tao.

The Tao follows Nature.

There was something

That into an indistinguishable mass had wrought itself,

Born before heaven and earth.

Desolate and formless,

It stood alone, unchanging,

And may be regarded as

The mother of heaven and earth.

Not knowing its name,

I gave it the alias "Tao,"

And reluctantly named it "vast."

Vast and moving;

Moving and far-reaching;

Far-reaching and reverting.

The Tao is vast;

Heaven is vast;

Earth is vast;

The king is also vast.

In the empire, there are four vasts,

And the king constitutes one.

Man imitates earth;

Earth imitates heaven;

Heaven imitates the Tao;

The Tao imitates the way things are.

There is something that is overt and hidden,

That exists beyond heaven and earth.

Formless, motionless,

It stands alone, forever, it does not change,

It exists in every place, it never tires.

It can be called "Mother of the universe,"

Because I don't know its name.

If I am compelled to call it by a name,

I will call it Tao, "all-embracing."

"All-embracing" exists forever,

"All-embracing" is far-reaching,

"All-embracing" returns to every beginning.

Therefore Tao is "all-embracing,"

Heaven is "all-embracing,"

Earth is "all-embracing,"

Man is "all-embracing."

In the universe, four things are "all-embracing,"

And man is one of them.

Man adheres to the laws of earth,

Earth adheres to the laws of heaven,

Heaven adheres to the laws of Tao,

Tao adheres to the laws of its nature.

There is a thing confusedly formed,

Born before heaven and earth.

Silent and void

It stands alone and does not change,

Goes round and does not weary.

It is capable of being the mother of the world.

I know not its name

So I style it 'the way'.

I
give it the makeshift name of 'the great'.

Being great, it is further described as receding,

Receding, it is described as far away,

Being far away, it is described as turning back.

Hence
the way is great;

Heaven is great;

Earth is great;

The king is also great.

Within the realm there are four things that are great,

And the king counts as one.

Man
models himself on earth,

Earth on heaven,

Heaven on the way,

And the way on that which is naturally so.

Imaging the Mysterious

There is a Being wondrous and complete. Before heaven and earth, it was. How calm it is! How spiritual!

Alone it standeth, and it changeth not; around it moveth, and it suffereth not; yet therefore can it be the world's mother.

Its name I know not, but its nature I call Reason.

Constrained to give a name, I call it the great. The great I call the departing, and the departing I call the beyond. The beyond I call home.

The saying goes: "Reason is great, heaven is great, earth is great, and royalty also is great.[There are four things in the world that are great, and royalty is one of them.]

Man's standard is the earth. The earth's standard is heaven. Heaven's standard is Reason. Reason's standard is intrinsic.

Before the universe was manifest a perfect emptiness abided. It is eternally still and silent, but creates infinite things. Not having a name, I call it the Tao. Being indescribable, I call it great. Infinite things constantly flow through it, never ceasing. The Tao is great, The universe is great, The earth is great, Man is great. Man must follow the natural laws of the earth, The earth must follow the natural laws of the universe, The universe must follow the natural laws of the Tao, The Tao simply is.

A matter is molded;

it comes into being before the universe, noiseless and formless.

It stands by itself, unwaveringly;

it is in motion, unendingly.

It may be the Mother to the universe.

I do not know its name.

Tentatively, [I] label it Direction and call it Grand.

Grand is unending motion;

unending motion is far-reaching;

Far-reaching is periodicity.

Thus,

Direction is grand,

the cosmos is grand,

the earth is grand,

the human is also grand.

There are four Grands in the universe, and the human is one of them.

The human follows the earth,

The earth follows the cosmos,

The cosmos follows Direction,

Direction follows Nature.

There was something all murky shadow, born before heaven and earth:

o such utter silence, utter emptiness.

Isolate and changeless,

it moves everywhere without fail:

picture the mother of all beneath heaven.

I don't know its name.

I'll call it Way,

and if I must name it, name it Vast.

Vast means it's passing beyond,

passing beyond means it's gone far away,

and gone far away means it's come back.

Because Way is vast

heaven is vast,

earth is vast,

and the true emperor too is vast.

In this realm, there are four vast things,

and the true emperor is one of them.

Human abides by earth.

Earth abides by heaven.

Heaven abides by Way.

Way abides by occurrence appearing of itself.

There was a chaotic formation of matter,

Before the existence of Heaven and Earth.

It was so noiseless, so shapeless, all alone and unchanging,

It is moving around endlessly.

It can be the mother of Heaven and Earth.

I do not know its name, but call it Tao.

If I must I name it Great Reality.

Being great means receding,

Receding means going faraway and

Being faraway is followed by returning to the origin.

Therefore,

Tao is great, Heaven is great, Earth is great and Humanity is also great.

There are four great realities in the universe, and

Humanity is one of them.

Humanity follows the Earth;

Earth, Heaven;

Heaven, Tao and

Tao, Nature.

A
presence of a thing mixed completely

Before the birth of heavens and earth

So lonely, so deserted

Standing alone yet without deviating

Working everywhere yet lacking danger

Action of the mother of the world can happen.

I
have no knowledge of its name

Giving a word, I say tao.

Stubbornly trying to name it I say great

Great, I say passing by

Passing by, I say far-reaching

Far-reaching, I say returning.

So
tao is great, heavens are great, earth is great

Kings are also great.

In the center of the universe are four greatnesses

Yet kings stand still, blending them into one.

Man
is an offshoot of earth

Earth is an offshoot of the heavens

The heavens are an offshoot of tao

Tao is an offshoot of the natural.

There is a being, of unknown origin, which existed before heaven and earth; imperceptible and undefined, unique and immutable, omnipresent, the mother of everything there is.

I do not know it by its own name. I designate it by the word Principle. If it were necessary to name it, one would call it the Great,

great going forth, great distance, great return. (The principle of the great cyclic evolution of the cosmos, of the becoming and ending of all beings).

The name Great befits (proportionally) four (superimposed) beings: The emperor, the earth, heaven (the classical Chinese triad), and the Principle.

The emperor owes his greatness to the earth (his theater), earth owes its greatness to heaven (of which it is the fruit), heaven owes its greatness to the Principle (of which it is the principal agent). (Greatness borrowed, as one can see, whereas) the Principle owes its essential greatness to its underived, uncreated existence.

There is something formlessly created

Born before Heaven and Earth

So silent! So ethereal!

Independent and changeless

Circulating and ceaseless

It can be regarded as the mother of the world

I do not know its name

Identifying it, I call it "Tao"

Forced to describe it, I call it great

Great means passing

Passing means receding

Receding means returning

Therefore the Tao is great

Heaven is great

Earth is great

The sovereign is also great

There are four greats in the universe

And the sovereign occupies one of them

Humans follow the laws of Earth

Earth follows the laws of Heaven

Heaven follows the laws of Tao

Tao follows the laws of nature

There is something that is formless, shapeless and non-physical, and yet also complete and perfect. Whatever it is, this "thing" existed before the universe came into being.

How silent, tranquil and still! How ethereal, empty and boundless! It is completely independent and self-sufficient. Its nature is eternal and unchanging. Its functions circulate within every level of existence without ever stopping. Because it is the source of all creation, we can consider it to be the mother of all things.

I do not know its name; I do not even know that it has a name. In order to identify it, I reluctantly call it the arbitrary name "Tao." If I were forced to describe it, I would have to say it is great beyond compare. Being great, it is always in a state of transition. Being perpetually in motion, it seems to recede far away from us. Being far away, it returns again to us. This great circle is the nature of Tao.

Therefore, the Tao is great. Heaven and Earth, being manifestations of the Tao, are also great. A leader who manifests the Tao, and can serve as an example for the people, is also great. He or she occupies one of the four aspects of greatness.

The universe is an orchestrated symphony, where human beings follow the laws of the land in which they live. At a level above this, the Earth follows the laws of astronomy - the rules that govern the motions of heavenly bodies. The cosmos in turn follow the patterns of the Tao at a macroscopic level. Ultimately, the Tao itself follows natural laws, which arise from the Tao process. This underscores the self-sufficiency and self-completeness of the Tao.

DESCRIBING THE MYSTERIOUS

There is Being that is all-inclusive and that existed before Heaven and Earth. Calm, indeed, and incorporeal! It is alone and changeless!

Everywhere it functions unhindered. It thereby becomes the world's mother. I do not know its nature; if I try to characterize it, I will call it Tao.

If forced to give it a name, I will call it the Great. The Great is evasive, the evasive is the distant, the distant is ever coming near. Tao is Great. So is Heaven great, and so is Earth and so also is the representative of Heaven and Earth.

Man is derived from nature, nature is derived from Heaven, Heaven is derived from Tao. Tao is self-derived.

There was something nebulous existing (yu wu hun ch'eng),

Born before heaven and earth.

Silent, empty,

Standing alone (tu), altering not (pu kai),

Moving cyclically without becoming exhausted (pu tai),

Which may be called the mother of all under heaven.

I know not its name,

I give its alias (tzu), Tao.

If forced to picture it,

I say it is "great" (ta).

To say it is "great" is to say it is "moving away" (shih),

To say it is "moving away" is to say it is "far away" (yüan),

To say it is "far away" is to say it is "returning" (fan).

Therefore Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

The king is also great.

In the realm there are four greats,

And the king is one of them.

Humans follow (fa) earth,

Earth follows heaven,

Heaven follows Tao,

Tao follows self-becoming (tzu-jan).

There is something mysterious, without beginning, without end, that existed before the heavens and earth. Unmoving; infinite; standing alone; never changing. It is everywhere and it is inexhaustible. It is the mother of all.

I do not know its name. If I must name it I call it Tao and I hail it as supreme.

Supreme means never?ending; never?ending means far-reaching; and far-reaching means returning. Thus Tao is supreme, the heavens are supreme, earth is supreme, and man is supreme. There are four supremes in the universe; man is one of them.

Man is subject to the laws of the earth, the earth is subject to the laws of the universe, the universe is subject to the laws of Tao, and Tao is subject to the laws of its own Nature.

Before the birth of Heaven and Earth,

there was something without form but complete.

Silent. Empty. Independent. Unchanging. Infinite. Eternal.

It is the Mother of all things.

I cannot classify it, but I call it Tao.

Powerful, it creates all things, is present in all things, returns all things to their origin.

The Tao is great. Heaven is great.

Earth is great. Humanity is great.

These are the four great things.

Humanity follows Earth. Earth follows Heaven.

Heaven follows Tao. Tao follows its own nature.

Twenty-five

Something mysteriously formed,

Born before heaven and Earth.

In the silence and the void,

Standing alone and unchanging,

Ever present and in motion.

Perhaps it is the mother of ten thousand things.

I do not know its name

Call it Tao.

For lack of a better word, I call it great.

Being great, it flows

I flows far away.

Having gone far, it returns.

Therefore,
"Tao is great;

Heaven is great;

Earth is great;

The king is also great."

These are the four great powers of the universe,

And the king is one of them.

Man
follows Earth.

Earth follows heaven.

Heaven follows the Tao.

Tao follows what is natural.

There is a thing integratedly formed

And born earlier than heaven and earth.

Silent and empty,

It relies on nothing,

Moving around for ever.

We may regard it as the mother of all things.

I do not know its name,

So I name it as the Tao,

And further name it as the Great.

The Great is moving forward without stopping,

Extending to the remotest distance,

And then returning to where it was.

That is why I say

The Tao is Great;

Heaven is Great;

Earth is Great;

And man is also Great.

There are four things that are Great,

Of them man is one.

Man takes earth as his model;

Earth takes heaven as its model;

Heaven takes the Tao as its model;

The Tao takes what is natural as its model.

There is something undifferentiated

That precedes the birth of Heaven and Earth.

Silent and still,

It stands by itself and never changes -

All-pervading and never in danger.

One may regard it as the mother of Heaven and Earth.

I don't know its proper name;

I address it as Tao.

Were I forced to name it, I would call it Great.

"Great" means "to go."

"To go" means "far away."

"Far away" means "to return."

Therefore Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

The king is also great.

In the universe there are four greats.

King is one of them.

The measure for man is Earth;

The measure for Earth is Heaven;

The measure for Heaven is Tao;

The measure for Tao is tzu-jan.

There is an admixture,

Which existed before heaven and earth.

As silent as it is nebulous,

It exists alone and it is permanent.

It moves around a circle unceasingly.

It is the mother of the universe.

I do not know its name and I have decided to call it Dao.

Arbitrarily, I describe it as great.

So great that it begins to permeate everywhere.

Permeating outwards, it goes farther and farther away.

Nevertheless, it will soon return to its original state again.

Therefore, Dao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

Humanity is great.

In the universe, humanity is one of the four greats.

Man models earth;

Earth models heaven;

Heaven models Dao.

And Dao models nature.

Symbol of the Great Origin

Hsiang Yuan

There is something formless and perfect,

Ever-existing, even before birth of Heaven and Earth.

How still it is!

How quiet!

Abiding alone and unchanging,

It pervades everywhere without fail.

Well may it be the mother of the world.

I do not know its name,

But label it Tao,

And arbitrarily name it Great.

Great means going incessantly;

Going incessantly means reaching far;

Reaching far means completing the cycle.

Therefore,

Tao is Great;

Heaven is Great;

Earth is Great;

Kingliness is Great.

In the cosmos there are four Greats,

And Kingliness constitutes one of them.

Man patterns after Earth;

Earth patterns after Heaven;

Heaven patterns after Tao;

Tao patterns after Innate Freedom.

Before Heaen and Earth came into existence

There was That which though formless was complete.

Silent! Still! Unfathomable!

It stands alone, unchanging!

All-pervading, inexhaustible!

One may think of it as the Mother of the Universe.

What its real name is I do not know:

If I name it, I call it the Tao.

If I classify it, I call it Supreme.

Supreme means ever in flow;

Ever in flow means going far away;

Going far away means returning to the source.

Therefore we may say:

The Tao is supreme;

Heaven too is supreme;

The Earth is supreme.

A ruler of men may also be supreme.

There are four things that are supreme, and a ruler of men is one of them.

Man follows the standards of the Earth;

The Earth follows the standards of Heaven;

Heaven follows the standards of the Tao.

The Tao follows its own standard.

Something there is without form and complete,

Born before heaven and earth,

Solitary and vast,

Standing alone without change,

Everywhere pervading all things,

Mothering all beneath heaven.

I don't know its name;

I style it Tao,

And for want of a name call it great.

To be great is to go on.

To go on is to be far.

To be far is to return.

Therefore,

Tao is great.

Earth is great.

Man is great.

The universe has four greats,

And man is one of them.

Man follows earth;

Earth follows heaven;

Heaven follows Tao;

Tao follows itself.

Before Heaven and Earth are born, there is something formless and complete in itself.

Impalpable and everlasting,

silent and undisturbed,

standing alone and unchanging,

it exercises itself gently,

and generates itself inexhaustively in all dimensions.

It may be regarded as the Mother of all things.

Far beyond humankind's relative conception,

it cannot be referred to by a specific name,

yet it may be identified as the subtle essence of the universe.

In the absence of an accurate word,

I shall call it "the Great."

Being great, it extends itself without limit.

Extending itself without limit, it is far-reaching.

Being far-reaching, it ultimately reverts to itself,

returning to its self-sufficient origin.

Indeed, it had never really left itself!

This indefinable subtle energy flow is truly the greatest of all.

Expressing its integral nature,

the universal subtle essence remains intangible, yielding, and uncontrollable:

the ultimate expression of the cosmos.

As an expression of its unceasing creativeness,

it manifests as the spaciousness of the sky.

As an expression of its receptiveness,

it manifests as the great massiveness of galaxies, stars, and planets.

As an expression of harmonious reintegration,

it manifests as human life.

Thus, in the natural flow of energy transformation, human life becomes one of the four great expressions of the subtle essence of the universe.

It is the way of universal subtle integration.

Humankind conforms to Earth.

Earth conforms to the sky.

The sky conforms to the Subtle Origin.

The Subtle Origin conforms to its own nature.

These are the four peaks of manifestation from the great transformation of one universal subtle energy.

Taking an individual human life as example,

the intangible body with its fluids and nervous system construct a field of intangible, but functioning mind and super consciousness.

XXV.

Imaging
the Mystery

There
was a Thing, all-holding, all-complete,

Which
WAS before existed Heaven and Earth,

Changeless!
Formless! Solitary! Calm!

All-pervading!
Unlimited! the birth

Of
all the mighty universe concealed

Within
the Motherhood not yet revealed.

I do
not know its name; the Way; the Course;

The
Tao, I call it; if constrained to make

A
name, I call it furthermore The Great!

And Great, it passes onward and away,

Tis
afar, and from afar returning flows,

The ebb
of that great tide which sourceless rose.

Now
then the Tao is great, and Heaven is great,

And
Earth is great, and greatness is of Kings;

Within
the world the greatnesses are four,

And
one
is
he who rules o er men and things;

Man
takes his law from Earth; from Heaven this:

Heaven
from the Tao; the Tao from what it is.

There was a Being already perfect before the existence of Heaven and Earth.

It is calm! It is formless!

It stands alone and changes not!

Reaching everywhere and inexhaustible,

It may be regarded as Mother of the Universe.

I do not know its name.

For a title we call it the Tao.

If forced to give it a name we call it the Great.

Great, we call it the Flowing,

Flowing we call it distant,

Distant, we call it Coming again.

Therefore the Tao is Great, Heaven is Great,

The Earth is Great, the Ruler is also Great.

In the Universe four are Great,

And the Ruler is one of them.

Man finds his law in the Earth.

The Earth finds its law in Heaven,

Heaven finds its law in the Tao,

The Tao finds its law in the affirmation of Self.

There
was Something undefined and complete in itself,

Born
before Heaven-and-Earth.

Silent
and

endless,

Standing
alone

without
change,

Being
within all,

It
may be thought of as

the
Mother of the world.

I
do not know its name;

I
write it

"Tao
(the Laws of the Universe)";

Without
a better word,

call
it

"The
Great."

To
be great is

to
go on,

To
go on is

to
go far,

To
go far is

to
return.

Therefore,

"Tao
(the Laws of the Universe) is great,

Heaven
is great,

Earth
is great,

The
Leader is great"

Thus
the Leader is

one
of the great four in the Universe.

Humans
follows

the
ways of the Earth.

Earth
follows

the
ways of Heaven,

Heaven
follows

the
ways of Tao (the Laws of the Universe),

Tao
(the Laws of the Universe) follows

its
own ways.

There was something in a state of fusion before heaven and earth were formed. How tranquil, how void it is; it stands alone and changes not, it permeates universally and never tires. It may be regarded as the mother of All-under-heaven.

Its proper name I know not, but I call it by the by-name "Way", and, to the best of my ability, inventing a term for it, I should call it "great". "Great" means "to pass on", "to pass on" means "to go far", "to go far" means "to revert" (t the contrary).

Thus: the Way is great, heaven is great, earth is great and the king is great. There are in the world four great ones and the king is one thereof. The king patterns himself on earth, earth patterns itself on heaven, heaven patterns itself on the Way, and the Way patterns itself on the Natural.

There was something undefined and complete, coming into

existence before Heaven and Earth. How still it was and formless,

standing alone, and undergoing no change, reaching everywhere and in

no danger (of being exhausted)! It may be regarded as the Mother of

all things.

I
do not know its name, and I give it the designation of the Tao

(the Way or Course). Making an effort (further) to give it a name I

call it The Great.

Great,
it passes on (in constant flow). Passing on, it becomes

remote. Having become remote, it returns. Therefore the Tao is

great; Heaven is great; Earth is great; and the (sage) king is also

great. In the universe there are four that are great, and the (sage)

king is one of them.

Man
takes his law from the Earth; the Earth takes its law from

Heaven; Heaven takes its law from the Tao. The law of the Tao is its

being what it is.

Without form, and 'void,' yet whole and complete;
born before Heaven
and Earth;
Silent and ephemeral, it stood alone and unchanging.

We
may regard it as the Mother of Heaven and Earth.
Not knowing it's name, I
call it THOU.
If forced to 'describe' it, I would call it 'Great.'
Greatness
implies infinity; infinity implies recoiling upon itself.
THOU
art Great.
Heaven is Great.
Earth is Great.
The King, too, is Great.

Within
our Cosmos, there are Four "Greats,"
and the King is one of them.
Humanity
patterns itself after IN, the Earth.
Earth patterns itself after ANKH, Heaven.

Heaven patterns itself after THOU.
THOU patterns itself.

Before
creation did occur

This blessed emptiness was here

Alone forever and at peace

The source of all that does appear

Eternally
unchanging

Forever lacking limit

This void is all potential

The everlasting ultimate

It
flows through all existence

And then returns to source

It's ever at your center

Your only true recourse

For
here begins the universe

The earth and humankind

Following this greatest way

You can never be defined

THERE was Something undefined and yet complete in itself,

Born before Heaven-and-Earth.

Silent and boundless,

Standing alone without change,

Yet pervading all without fail,

It may be regarded as the Mother of the world.

I do not know its name;

I style it "Tao";

And, in the absence of a better word, call it "The Great."

To be great is to go on,

To go on is to be far,

To be far is to return.

Hence, "Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

King is great."

Thus, the king is one of the great four in the Universe.

Man follows the ways of the Earth.

The Earth follows the ways of Heaven,

Heaven follows the ways of Tao,

Tao follows its own ways.

There is a mystery, something formless and perfect

before the universe was born.

It is tranquil. Empty.

Solitary. Unchanging.

Infinite. Eternally present.

It is the mother of everything.

I don't know its name.

Hence, when forced to name it, I call it "Tao." (the Way).

When attempting to categorize it, I call it "great."

Being great it flows through all things,inside and outside.

And being limitless it returns to the origin of all things.

The Tao is great.

The universe is great.

Earth is great.

Man is great.

These are the four great powers.

Man follows the laws of the earth.

Earth follows the laws of the universe.

The universe follows the laws of the Tao.

The law of the Tao is in being what it is.

Before the universe was born

there was something in the chaos of the heavens.

It stands alone and empty,

solitary and unchanging.

It is ever present and secure.

It may be regarded as the Mother of the universe.

Because I do not know its name,

I call it the Tao.

If forced to give it a name,

I would call it 'Great'.

Because
it is Great means it is everywhere.

Being everywhere means it is eternal.

Being eternal means everything returns to it.

Tao
is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

Humanity is great.

Within the universe, these are the four great things.

Humanity
follows the earth.

Earth follows Heaven.

Heaven follows the Tao.

The Tao follows only itself.

This is what Tao is not:

- It is not a thing.

- It is not a sound or any other vibration.

- It is not divisible into parts.

- It does not change.

- It cannot be diluted or augmented.

- It has no partner or complement.

This is what Tao is:

- It is one; it is unity.

- It determines everything.

- It comes before everything.

- It is the law of everything.

The clearest, most helpful word I know how to use for Tao is How, because Tao is the principle of how everything works.

Remember that while it has no form or qualities, it is everywhere, all the time, forever.

Imagine four levels of infinity; people are infinite in a sense; the earth is infinite; the cosmos is infinite, Tao is infinite. Although each of these four may be infinite in a way, the first three are subject to the next greater one.

People are dependent on the earth. The earth is dependent on the cosmos. The cosmos is dependent on Tao.

But Tao is not dependent on anything.

Before Heaven and Earth were born

There was something undescribable.

Perfectly still, having no form,

It stands alone, and does not change.

It acts perpetually, yet never tires.

It could very well be the Mother of the Universe.

I don't know its name, so I just call it the Tao.

If forced to give it a name, I would call it Great.

Being Great, I call it eternal.

Being eternal, I call it infinite.

Being infinite, I call it Reconciliation.

Therefore, the Tao is Great.

Heaven is Great.

The Earth is Great.

Humankind is also Great.

In the Universe there are these four things which are Great,

And Humankind is one of them.

Humankind follows the Earth,

The Earth follows Heaven,

Heaven follows the Tao,

And the Tao just acts like itself.

Before
the physical universe existed,

the potential of all things

permeated time and space.

It was silent and empty, loud and pregnant.

Solitary in its oneness, crowded in its potential,

static and dynamic, hot and cold, light and

dark.

The
potential of all things,

for lack of another name,

I call it Infinity.

It
permeates all things and non-things.

It manifests realities and disintegrates those

realities.

All things are birthed from it

and all things return to it.

Infinity
is marvelous.

The physical universe is marvelous.

The earth is marvelous.

Human beings are marvelous.

These
are the four realities.

Human
beings are a manifestation of the

earth;

the earth, a manifestation of the physical

universe;

the physical universe, a manifestation of

Infinity;

Infinity, the potential of all things.

Before the creation of Heaven and Earth,

there was something complete and without purpose.

Silent and desolate. Standing alone and unchanging. Cyclic and untiring.

Able to be the Mother beneath Heaven.

I do not know its Name. Its character is 'Tao'.

Powerful and Great; its Greatness spreads,

spreads into the distance, and from the distance, returns.

Hence Tao is great. Heaven is great. Earth is great. The King also is

great.

The Middle Kingdom has four greats, and the King is one.

Man follows the ways of the Earth.

Earth follows the way of Heaven.

Heaven follows the way of Tao.

And Tao follows its own ways.

There is something formless yet complete

Which existed before Heaven and Earth.

Silent and fathomless,

Alone and unchanging;

Inexhaustible and pervading everywhere,

It may be thought of as the Mother of all under Heaven.

I do not know its name; I shall call it Tao.

If pressed for a description, I would call it Great.

Being great is to go ever-onward.

Going ever-onward is to reach everywhere.

Reaching everywhere is to return.

Therefore Tao is great;

Heaven is great;

Earth is great;

The King is also great.

The universe contains four great things,

And one of them is the King.

Man follows Earth;

Earth follows Heaven;

Heaven follows Tao;

And Tao follows what is naturally so.

There is a mixture of substances

That is born before Heaven and Earth.

Quiet, far and wide, it turns round and round by itself.

It can be taken as the mother of Heaven and Earth.

I don't know what its name is,

But for the purpose here, let's call it the Way

And describe it as "big."

By "big," I mean it is the most expansive.

What is expansive extends the farthest.

What goes farthest will turn round.

Therefore, the Way is big,

The heaven is big,

The earth is big,

And mankind is big.

In the universe, there are four big growth domains,

With mankind being one of them.

Mankind's nature is determined by Earth,

Earth's nature is determined by Heaven,

Heaven's nature is determined by the Way.

And the Way, being the biggest of all,

Copies its own growth nature.

There was a chaotic something, yet lacking nothing born before Heaven and Earth. Alone. Still. Standing alone, unchanging. Revolving, endlessly. It can be thought of as Mother of the World.

I do not know its name, one can call it 'Tao.' The name of its powerful presence: One can call it 'The Great One.'

Great means going forth going forth means going far away going far away means turning back.

Yes: Tao is great Heaven is great Earth is great (the king is also great in the universe there are four great ones and the king takes his place as one of them).

Earth gives the rule for people Heaven gives the rule for Earth Tao gives the rule for Heaven the rule for Tao: things as they are.

Oh, That Which is born before sky and earth, living in calm, having no form, the subtlest, the only existing, abiding everywhere, boundless, invincible, the Mother of everything! You are called Tao. I call You also the Greatest, That Which is eternal in Its infinite development!

Man, earth, sky depend on Tao. But Tao exists by Itself.

Before the existence of Heaven and Earth,

It was something without beginning and end.

Unchanged existed in itself.

That something filled in everything without end.

It can be considered as the source of the Universe.

I cannot name it, but forced to give a name,

I name it Tao, I see it as supreme.

Supreme
means without end,

Having no end it can be everywhere,

It is both far and near,

That Supreme is Tao.

Heaven, Earth and man are supreme too,

A man follows the laws of the Earth,

The Earth those of the Heaven,

The Heaven follows Tao,

That is complete in itself.

There
is a thing that was turbidly formed, born before Heaven and Earth. Solitary
and vacant, it stands alone and unchanging. It reaches everywhere without falling
into any danger. It can be the mother of the world. I know not its taboo name.
To serve as a name-for-outsiders I call it Dao, and if forced to provide a taboo
name will call it the Great. Being great means going forward. Going forward
means being far. Being far means turning back on itself. So the Dao is great,
Heaven is great, Earth is great, and the king is also great. Within the domain
there are four greats, and the the king is one of them. Humans model themselves
on Earth, Earth models itself on Heaven, Heaven models itself on the Dao, and
the Dao models itself on what is as it is in itself.

There is a thing formed in chaos

Existing before Heaven and Earth.

Silent and solitary, it stands alone, unchanging.

It goes around without peril.

It may be the Mother of the world.

Not knowing its name, I can only style it Tao.

With reluctance, I would call it Great.

Great means out-going.

Out-going means far-reaching.

Far-reaching means returning.

Therefore, Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

The king is great.

In the universe, there are four great things,

and the king is one of them.

Man abides by earth,

Earth abides by heaven,

Heaven abides by Tao,

Tao abides by nature.

The Tao of Greatness

There was something in a state of fusion

Before Heaven and Earth were born.

Silent, vast,

Independent, and unchanging;

Working everywhere, tirelessly;

It can be regarded as Mother of the world.

I do not know its name;

The word I say is Tao.

Forced to give it a name,

I say Great.

Great means continuing.

Continuing means going far.

Going far means returning.

Therefore the Tao is Great.

Heaven and Earth are Great.

A leader is likewise Great.

In the universe there are four Greatness,

And leadership is one of them.

Humans are modeled on the earth.

The eart is modeled on heaven.

Heaven is modeled on the Tao.

The Tao is modeled on nature.

Lao Tzu said there are four great powers. The Dao, the Universe, the Earth and Man. Yet these four are all of one. He said, "Man follows the Earth. Earth follows the Universe. Universe follows the Dao. The Dao follows itself."

Something there is, whose veiled creation was

Before the earth or sky began to be;

So silent, so aloof and so alone,

It changes not, nor fails, but touches all:

Conceive it as the mother of the world.

I
do not know its name:

A name for it is "Way";

Pressed for designation,

I call it Great.

Great means outgoing,

Outgoing, far-reaching,

Far-reaching, return.

The
Way is great,

The sky is great,

The earth is great,

The king also is great.

Within the realm

These four are great;

The king but stands

For one of them.

Man
conforms to the earth;

The earth conforms to the sky;

The sky conforms to the Way;

The Way conforms to its own nature.

There was something undifferentiated and yet complete, which existed before Heaven and Earth.

Soundless and formless, it depends upon nothing external, operating in a circular motion ceaselessly.

It may be considered the root (Mother) of all beings under Heaven.

I don't know its name,

And call it Tao.

Inadequately giving it another name, I call it great.

The Great moves on,

The moving-on become remote,

The remote returns to the original point.

Therefore the Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

And Man is also great.

There are four great things in the universe,

And Man is one of them.

Man follows the way of Earth,

Earth follows the way of Heaven,

Heaven follow the way of Tao,

Tao follows the way of itself.

There is something, amorphous and complete, that was born before Heaven and Earth.

Obscure, oh, and, immaterial, oh, it stands alone, unchanged.

It operates everywhere but stays free from danger, thus we may consider it the mother of all under Heaven.

We do not know its name

So style it "Dao" [Way].

Forced to give it a name, we call it "great."

"Great" refers to the way it goes forth.

"Goes forth" describes how it is far-reaching, and "far-reaching" describes its reflexivity.

Thus the Dao is great, Heaven is great, Earth is great, and the king is also great.

Within the realm of existence there are the four greats,

And the king has title to one of these.

Man takes his models from Earth;

Earth takes its models from Heaven;

Heaven takes its models from the Dao;

and the Dao takes its models from the Natural.

1. There was something formed out of chaos,

2. That was born before Heaven and Earth.

3. Quiet and Still! Pure and deep!

4. It stands on its own and does not change.

5. It can be regarded as the mother of Heaven and Earth.

6. I do not yet know its name:

7. I "style" it "the Way."

8. Were I forced to give it a name, I would call it "the Great."

9.
"Great" means "to depart";

10. "To depart" means "to be far away";

11. And "to be far away" means "to return."

12.
The Way is great;

13. Heaven is great;

14. Earth is great;

15. And the king is also great.

16. In the country there are four greats, and the king occupies one place among
them.

17.
Man models himself on the Earth;

18. The Earth models itself on Heaven;

19. Heaven models itself on the Way;

20. And the Way models itself on that which is so on its own.

Something perfect
has existed forever,

even longer than the universe.

It's a vast, unchanging void.

There's nothing else like it.

It goes on forever and never stops.

Everything else came from it.

I don't know
what else to call it

So I'll call it Tao.

What's it like?

I can tell you this much: it's great.

Something that
great lasts.

Something that lasts goes a long way.

And something that goes a long way

always comes back to the beginning.

Tao's great.

Heaven's great.

Earth's great.

And someone who's in touch with Tao is great, too.

Those are the four greatest things in the universe

and a Master is one of them.

Someone who's in touch with Tao

is in touch with the earth.

The earth is in touch with heaven.

Heaven's in touch with Tao.

Tao's in touch with the way things are.

.

The Supreme

There is something mysterious and whole

which existed before heaven and earth,

silent, formless, complete, and never changing.

Living eternally everywhere in perfection,

it is the mother of all things.

I do not know its name; I call it the Way.

If forced to define it, I shall call it supreme.

Supreme means absolute.

Absolute means extending everywhere.

Extending everywhere means returning to itself.

Thus the Way is supreme.

Heaven is supreme.

Earth is supreme.

And the person is supreme.

There are four supremes in the universe,

and the person is one of them.

The person reflects the earth.

The earth reflects heaven.

Heaven reflects the Way.

And the Way reflects its own nature.

Before heaven and earth arose, the ONE is without a second unmanifest perfect silent unfathomable primordial ground.

Unmoved It is without change and division pervading all yet Itself impervious primordial womb of the world.

Nameless it is the ONE.

I call It: TAO.

Formless It is without attributes.

I name It: the limitless the circle reverting to itself.

Tao is infinite heaven is infinite earth is infinite man is infinite.

There are four infinites one of them is man: his law is the earth the law of earth is heaven the law of heaven is TAO Tao is a law unto Itself.

The Four Eternal Models

Lao Tze says,

There was something nebulous and complete which came into existence before the Heaven and the Earth.

It was soundless and formless, stood alone, and would not change, reached everywhere and was in no danger of being exhausted.

It is capable of being the mother of the world.

I do not know its name, and I give it the designation of the Tao, and it is further described as the great.

Being great it receded.

Receding, it became remote.

Having become remote, it turns back.

Therefore,

the Tao is great,

the Heaven is great,

the Earth is great,

and the Kingship is also great.

In the universe there are four elements that are great, and the Mankind is one of them.

The Mankind takes his law from the Earth,

the Earth takes its law from the Heaven,

and the Heaven takes its law from the Tao.

The law of the Tao is its being what it is.

THE CREATIVE PRINCIPLE OF TAO

The
creative principle unifies

the inner and external worlds.

It does not depend on time or space,

is ever still and yet in motion;

thereby it creates all things,

and is therefore called

'the creative and the absolute';

its ebb and its flow extend to infinity.

We
describe the Tao as being great;

we describe the universe as great;

nature too, we describe as great,

and man himself is great.

Man's
laws should follow natural laws,

just as nature gives rise to physical laws,

whilst following from universal law,

which follows the Tao.

There was something formless and perfect

before the universe was born.

It is serene. Empty.

Solitary. Unchanging.

Infinite. Eternally present.

It is the mother of the universe.

For lack of a better name,

I call it the Tao.

It flows through all things,

inside and outside, and returns

to the origin of all things.

The Tao is great.

The universe is great.

Earth is great.

Man is great.

These are the four great powers.

Man follows the earth.

Earth follows the universe.

The universe follows the Tao.

The Tao follows only itself.

There was something unique manifesting from chaos before the birth of Heaven and Earth.

Remotely!

It stands alone without deviation!

Cyclically!

It moves without an end!

It may be called the mother of the Heaven and the Earth.

We do not know its eternal name but give it the name Dao.

Constrained to give a name, it may be called "Movement".

After moving it is called "Departure".

After departing it is called "Extreme".

To avoid remaining in the extreme, it may be called "Return".

Dao is superior;

the universe is superior;

the world is superior;

and the ruler is superior.

There are four superiors in existence among which the ruler is one.

Thus, the ruler should follow the law of the world.

The world should follow the law of the universe.

The universe should follow the law of Dao.

Dao follows its own law - the law of Nature.

Matter is formed from chaos.

It was born before heaven and earth.

Silent and void.

Standing alone, without territory,

Able to be mother to the world.

I do not yet know its name,

I call it Tao.

With reluctance I deem it to be Great.

Great refers to the symbol.

The symbol refers to what is remote.

What is remote refers to returning.

Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

Kingship is great.

These are the four great things in the world,

Kingship is one of them.

Humankind takes its origin from earth.

Earth takes her origin from heaven.

Heaven takes its origin from Tao.

Tao takes its origin from Nature.

XXV

There
was something formed and complete

Before heaven and earth were born

Quiet, still, pure, deep; changeless and self-sufficient

Perhaps it is the womb in which the world grew

It has no name, properly speaking, though I call it the tao

If
I had to describe it, I'd call it 'The Spirit of Quiet Motion'

It is never still in the here and now

Always leaving, always absent, always returning, always here

If the tao is like this, then so is heaven, and so is earth,

And so could be leaders, if they would be the spirit of a nation

Men
conform to the actions of their leaders

Let the leaders conform to the patterns of the earth

As the earth conforms to the cycles of the heavens

And the heavens conform to the motion of the tao

And as the tao must, by necessity, conform to itself

Something Undifferentiated

Something undifferentiated was born before heaven and earth;

still and silent, standing alone and unchanging,

going through cycles unending,

able to be mother to the world.

I do not know its name;

I label it the Way.

Imposing on it a name,

I call it Great.

Greatness means it goes;

going means reaching afar;

reaching afar means return.

Therefore the Way is great,

heaven is great,

earth is great,

and kingship is also great.

Among domains are four greats,

of which kingship is one.

Humanity emulates earth,

earth emulates heaven,

heaven emulates the Way,

the Way emulates Nature.

There had been a chaotic object before the universe was born.

It is quiet and intangible.

It stays alone without changing.

It moves around without stopping.

It may be the mother of the universe.

I do not know the object's name.

I have attempted to designate it Tao, and to call it great.

The great constantly moves.

Constantly moving it reaches far.

Far-reaching causes it to return.

Therefore, Tao is great, the heaven is great, the earth is great, and the human is also great.

There are four greats in the universe, and the human is one of them.

The human follows the earth, the earth follows the heaven, the heaven follows Tao, and Tao goes naturally.

There was something chaotic and yet complete in itself, born before Heaven and Earth.

Silent and empty, standing alone and unchanging, pervading everywhere and inexhaustible, it may be regarded as the mother of the world.

I do not know its name, so I simply call it "the Way".

I reluctantly call it "the great."

To be great is to go on.

To go on is to go far.

To go far is to return.

Hence, "The Way is great. Heaven is great. Earth is great. Man is great." Thus, man is one of the great four in the universe.

Man follows Earth, Earth follows Heaven, Heaven follows the Way, the Way follows Nature.

Something mysteriously formed,

before heaven and earth,

Silently, intangibly, alone and unchanging,

repeating, permeating eternally,

mother of everything.

I do not know its name.

Call it Tao, or Great.

Great means
flows
,

it flows far,

far and return
.

Therefore, Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

Kings are also great.

the four great powers of the universe.

King is one of them.

Man follows the earth.

Earth follows heaven.

Heaven follows the Taos.

The Taos follows the Tao.

Something formless yet complete,

existing before heaven and earth.

Silent and limitless,

it stands alone and does not change.

Reaching everywhere, it does not tire.

Perhaps it is the Mother of all things under heaven.

I do not know its name

so I call it "Tao."

When
I have to describe it I call it "great."

Being great it flows.

It flows far away.

Having gone far away, it returns.

Therefore,
the Tao is great.

Heaven is great.

Earth is great.

People are also great.

Thus, people constitute one of the

four great things of the universe.

People
conform to the earth.

The earth conforms to heaven.

Heaven conforms to the Tao.

The Tao conforms to its own nature.

Even
before the earth and the sky existed,

there was already something

something not material, something silent.

Something free -- dependent on nothing, being nothing in itself,

empty and silent, everywhere yet unchanging and inexhaustible.

What was there before the Big Bang?

One can think of it as the pre-origin of the universe,

or god or goddess, or natural law, or physics.

Still, it really has no name.

The way, or the Dao, is simply the nickname I give it.

If I felt compelled to call it something else,

I'd call it "great" because it extends forever

and in going on forever,

it returns back to itself.

The
Dao is great, so is the sky, the earth,

and also the human being.

In the universe there are four great things,

and humanity is one of them.

Humanity
follows the nature of the earth,

earth follows the nature of the sky,

the sky follows the nature of the Dao,

and the Dao follows its own way -- naturally.

Before heaven and earth here was something nebulous, formless yet complete;

without sound, without substance, isolated, free from all form;

standing alone and depending on nothing, unchanging, operating everywhere, all
pervading, revolving and without fail.

One can think of it as the mother of all

I don't know its true name. I call it dao.

"Way" is the by-name.

If forced to give it a name I can call it great (ta) .

Now such greatness implies reaching out in space, and also means functioning
everywhere, or passing on;

Space-yielding or functioning everywhere signifies far-reaching. And passing
on means going far away,

To go really far is to return to the original point. To reach far is a return.
To go far away means to return.

So dao is great and far-reaching, and so is heaven, earth and the king.

For just as dao, earth and heaven each has its subtle greatness, so does the
ruler.

There are four great things in the universe, and the king is one of them. So
within the realm there are four portions of greatness", and one belongs to the
king.

The ways of men are conditioned by those of earth.

The ways of earth, by those of heaven.

The ways of heaven by those of dao,

and the ways of dao by the Self-so's

Dao in turn models itself after Nature.

There was something featureless yet complete,

born before heaven and earth;

Silent - amorphous - it stood alone and unchanging.

We may regard it as the mother of heaven and earth.

Not knowing its name,

I style it the "Way."

If forced to give it a name,

I would call it "great."

Being great implies flowing ever onward,

Flowing ever onward implies far-reaching,

Far-reaching implies reversal.

The Way is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

The king, too, is great.

Within the realm there are four greats, and the king is one among them.

Man patterns himself on earth,

Earth patterns itself on heaven,

Heaven patterns itself on the Way,

The Way patterns itself on nature.

Before Heaven and Earth existed there was in Nature a primordial substance.

It was serene, it was fathomless.

It was self-existent, it was homogeneous.

It was omnipresent, nor suffered any limitation.

It is to be regarded as the universal mother.

I do not know its name, but I call it Tao.

If forced to qualify it, I call it the boundless.

Being boundless, I call it the inconceivable.

Being inscrutable, I call it the inaccessible.

Being inaccessible, I call it the omnipresent.

Tao is supreme, Heaven is supreme, Earth is supreme, the King is supreme.

There are in the universe four kinds of supremacy, and their rulership is one.

Man is ruled by the Earth, the Earth is ruled by Heaven, Heaven is ruled by Tao, and Tao is ruled by itself.

The Tao of Love

Before the universe was born

the solitary, infinite, changeless, formless, eternal Tao

was.

This Tao gave birth to the universe

and also to the love

that flows in your relationship.

This flowing love binds you and your beloved

to all things in creation

and returns you again to the Tao,

no beginning

no end.

The wonder of your life together

is not due to your effort.

It is a natural unfolding of the Tao.

You can trust it.

You can rest on it.

You are not generating it

by the power of your will.

Let yourself enjoy this day,

watching the various threads

add their contribution to the tapestry of your life.

There was something undifferentiated and yet complete, Which existed
before heaven and earth. Soundless and formless, it depends on nothing
and does not change. It operates everywhere and is free from danger. It
may be considered the mother of the universe.

I do not know its name; I call it Tao. If forced to give it a name, I shall call it Great.

Now being great means functioning everywhere. Functioning everywhere
means far-reaching. Being far-reaching means returning to the original
point.

Therefore Tao is great Heaven is great. Earth is great. And the king is also great.

Man models himself after Earth. Earth models itself after Heaven.
Heaven models itself after Tao. And Tao models itself after Nature.

Before creation
a presence existed,

Self-contained, complete,

Formless, voiceless, mateless,

Changeless,

Which yet pervaded itself

With unending motherhood.

Though there can be no name for it,

I have called it 'the way of life.'

Perhaps I should have called it 'the fullness of life,'

Since fullness implies widening into space,

Implies still further widening,

Implies widening until the circle is whole.

In this sense

The way of life is fulfilled,

Heaven is fulfilled,

Earth fulfilled

And a fit man also is fulfilled:

These are the four amplitudes of the universe

And a fit man is one of them:

Man rounding the way of earth,

Earth rounding the way of heaven,

Heaven rounding the way of life

Till the circle is full.

It started in chaos, before the heavens and the earth existed.

It makes no sound and has no shape,

But it is independent and never changes.

It is always functioning and never stops,

So it can be the root of the world.

I do not know its name, so I name it the DAO,

And I will also call it the BIG.

BIG means broad, broad means far-reaching,

Far-reaching means everywhere.

Therefore, the DAO is BIG, the heavens is BIG,

The earth is BIG, and people are BIG, too.

The universe has four BIGs, and people are only one of them.

People follow the earth, the earth follows the heavens,

The heavens follows the DAO, and the DAO follows nature.

Before the birth of Heaven and Earth is Being, formless yet complete.

Silent and still,

All one and unchanging, all present and unending,

It may be regarded as the Matrix of the Universe.

Its true name is unknown,

So we call it by its alias, the Tao,

And name it by its designation, the Great.

Being great, it extends without limit,

Extending without limit, it is far-reaching,

Being far-reaching, it returns to itself.

The Tao is great,

Heaven is great,

Earth is great,

And Man is also great.

These are the four greatnesses of the Kosmos,

And of them Man is one.

Man patterns after Earth,

Earth patterns after Heaven,

Heaven patterns after the Tao,

And the Tao patterns after that which is natural.

There is a mixture of substances

That is born before Heaven and Earth.

Quiet, far and wide, it turns round and round by itself.

It can be taken as the mother of Heaven and Earth.

I don't know what its name is,

But for the purpose here, let's call it the Way

And describe it as "big."

By "big," I mean it is the most expansive.

What is expansive extends the farthest.

What goes farthest will turn round.

Therefore, the Way is big,

The heaven is big,

The earth is big,

And mankind is big.

In the universe, there are four big growth domains,

With mankind being one of them.

Mankind's nature is determined by Earth,

Earth's nature is determined by Heaven,

Heaven's nature is determined by the Way.

And the Way, being the biggest of all,

Copies its own growth nature.

There is a mystery, something formless and perfect

before the universe was born.

It is tranquil. Empty.

Solitary. Unchanging.

Infinite. Eternally present.

It is the mother of everything.

I don't know its name.

Hence, when forced to name it, I call it "Tao." (the Way).

When attempting to categorize it, I call it "great."

Being great it flows through all things,inside and outside.

And being limitless it returns to the origin of all things.

The Tao is great.

The universe is great.

Earth is great.

Man is great.

These are the four great powers.

Man follows the laws of the earth.

Earth follows the laws of the universe.

The universe follows the laws of the Tao.

The law of the Tao is in being what it is.

