===== Chapter 70 =====

My words are very easy to understand.

Very easy to practice.

There are none in the world who can understand [them].

None who can practice [them].

Words have an ancestor.

Affairs have a sovereign.

Precisely because one does not understand [this]

Is the reason one does not understand me.

Those who understand me are rare.

Those who follow me are prized.

Therefore, the sages

Are covered in coarse cloth

[But carry in their] bosoms a jewel.

My words are very easy to understand, Very easy to practice. No one under heaven can understand them, No one can practice them.

Words have ancestors, Deeds have masters. If people don't understand
this, They don't understand me. Few understand me, And that is my value.

Therefore the Sage wears rough clothing And carries Jade inside.

My words are easy to understand

And it is easy to follow them.

Yet they can be grasped by no one in the world

And there is no one who can follow them.

My words are of an ancient origin.

My actions are guided by reason.

Yet this remains unknown,

So I remain unknown, too.

Those who know me are few

This is what honors me.

The sage wears plain clothing.

His true wealth is concealed in his heart.

YOU KNOW ME NOT

Being very easy to comprehend,

These teachings are simple to practice.

Yet, few are they who will release ego

sufficiently to achieve understanding,

let alone the ability to practice.

These teachings have their source in nature,

Their master is the Tao.

Not comprehending this,

People find great difficulty in understanding the Sage.

So, with few people really understanding him,

He is most highly valued.

Thus the Sage,

Tho' presenting a poor appearance, to the world,

Yet carries the riches of nature embedded in his core.

Their sayings are very easy to know and very easy to practice in Heaven below (the sacred body).

Without the power to perceive, without the power to progress;

Speech arises from your past.

Deeds are exalted.

For this exact reason the master knows emptiness.

This is the reason they are not recognized.

Know their soundlessness.

Emulate them.

Treasure the sage who wears coarse clothes and hides their jewels.

THE DIFFICULTY OF RIGHT APPREHENSION

My words are easy to understand and to perform; but is there anyone in

the world who can understand them and perform them?

My
words derive from a creative and universal Principle, in accord with

the One Law. Men, not knowing these, understand me not.

Few
are they that understand me; therefore am I the more to be valued.

The Wise Man weareth sack-cloth, but guardeth his jewel in his bosom.

My words are very easy to know, and very easy to practise; but thereis no one in the world who is able to know and able to practise them. Thereis an originating and all- comprehending (principle) in my words, and anauthoritative law for the things (which I enforce). It is because theydo not know these, that men do not know me. They who know me are few, andI am on that account-(the more) to be prized. It is thus that the sagewears (a poor garb of) hair cloth, while he carries his (signet of) jadein his bosom.

My words are easy to comprehend

And easy to bring to practice

Yet no one in the world wants to surrender to them

And no one feels capable of living according to them

My words have an origin, my way of living a principle

But because the people do not dare to see this

They are not able to understand me

There are only a few who understand me and to them I am most precious

One who is wise therefore acts unnoticed, but remains oneself

The things I am saying are very easy to understand and very easy to practice. Yet no one in the world can comprehend them fully nor practice them perfectly.

The things I am saying did not originate with me but have their source in Nature. It is because men do not understand this source that they do not understand me. Since those who understand me are few, they are, for that reason, all the more worthy of emulation.

Therefore the intelligent man presents a poor exterior, yet carries Nature's riches embedded in his core.

My words are very easy to understand

And very easy to put into practice.

Yet no one under heaven understands them;

No one puts them into practice.

But my words have an ancestry, my deeds have a lord;

And it is precisely because men do not understand this

That they are unable to understand me.

Few then understand me, but it is upon this very fact my value depends.

It is indeed in this sense that "the Sage wears hair-cloth on top,

But carries jade under neath his dress."

What I teach is easy to understand and practice,

yet no one understands it or puts it to practice.

My words are from the source.

My actions are those of the ancestor.

People do not understand this.

Therefore, they do not understand me.

Those who see me as I am are rare.

Those who seek to follow my teachings are few.

The sage wears coarse clothing

but carries jade in his pockets.

My words are very easy to understand

Very easy to practice

(But) nobody in the world can understand

Nobody can practice

Expressions presume a lineage

Endeavors presume a master

Insofar as these are unknown

So it is that we are not known

Those who know me are few

Accordingly I am valued

This is why wise ones wear common cloth

Concealing jade in the heart

Individuality

My words are easy to understand

and easy to put in practice,

Yet no one in the world do understand them,

And no one put them into practice.

Now, my words have an ancestor.

And my deeds have a lord.

And it is simply because [people]

have no understanding [of them],

That they therefore do not understand me.

But when those who understand me are few;

Then I am of great value.

Therefore the sage wears coarse woolen cloth

But inside it, he holds on to jade.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to put into practice. But you can't "understand" them, can't put them into "practice."

Words have their ruler. Eventshave their origins. People who can't understand this can't understand me. Those who do are few.

They wear coarse cloth and carry jade in their breasts.

My words can transform understanding,

And are very easy to live with:

So why doesn't the world understand them?

And why doesn't it live by them?

My words have a primal Origin;

My action also has its natural Guide.

If you don't know these,

Then you can't know me.

Thus, there are but few

Who can understand my words.

To these, the words point the way

To their own inner treasure.

Such awareness is often couched

In coarse appearance,

Nurturing the jewel within.

In this poem, Lao Tzu asks the Tao itself to speak in the first person, describing its nature, action, and the correct means of approaching it. In the very first line, the essence of the Tao in action is revealed: transformation. The Pinyin Chinese word for transformation is "yi," the very same character in the title of the oracle, "Yi Jing" (which is the same as I Ching in the Wade-Giles system of transliteration). As in Chapter 1 and throughout the Tao Te Ching, Lao Tzu describes the natural use of language as the path of Te, or Modesty: the Tao in action within the human realm of being. Words cannot tell us what Tao is, but they can tell us what it does—how it functions through our unique consciousness. Language arises from inner clarity, and it expresses this clarity; then, it returns to the Origin, which is silence. This is the transformative path of natural language—a path that is described here and in Hexagram 1 of the I Ching.

My teachings are easily understood

and readily put into practice.

Yet not everyone understands them,

not everyone practices them.

Words
have specific origins,

deeds specific controls.

Not having such knowledge,

people do not know me.

Being unknown, honor is mine.

Unknown, I am distinguished.

The
wise wear common clothes

and carry jewels in their hearts.

It is very easy to comprehend my teachings and to put them into practice. Yet there is no one in the world who is able either to comprehend, or to practice them.

There is an originating principle for speech, an authoritative law for conduct, but because this knowledge is lacking I am unknown. Those who know Me are few; those who imitate Me are worthy. Hence the Holy Man wears coarse garments, but carries a jewel in his bosom.

Words have an ancestor; deeds have a governor.

My words are very easy to know, and very easy to practise,

Yet all men in the world do not know them nor practise them.

It is because they have knowledge that they do not know me.

When those who know me are few, eventually I am beyond all praise.

Therefore the Sage wears clothes of coarse cloth but carries jewels in his bosom;

He knows himself but does not display himself;

He loves himself but does not hold himself in high esteem.

Thus he rejects the latter and takes the former.

Difficulty in Knowing How

My words are profoundly easy to know.

Profoundly easy to perform.

In the social world none are able to know or to perform.

Language has an ancestor and social affairs have a ruler.

In general only lacking know-how--this counts as my know-how.

If those who know me are rare then things of mine are valuable.

Using this: Sages wrap precious jade in burlap.

It is not difficult to grasp my words or to follow them.

Yet no one in the world can grasp them or follow them.

Because words must derive from the source of words,

Action requires an actor who acts.

Since you are not aware of this, you cannot know me.

The less people know me, the more valuable I am.

Thus, the wise is covered with tattered clothes which conceal precious jade.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to practise.

Yet no one in the world can understand them and put them into practice.

The words have a root.

The affairs have a sovereign.

Because people are ignorant, they do not understand me.

Those who understand me are few.

That is why I become valued.

This is why the sage does not flaunt himself but holds the treasure in his heart.

My words are exceedingly easy to understand,

Exceedingly easy to practice.

Yet none under heaven can understand them,

None can practice them.

Words have their progenitor;

Affairs have their sovereign.

It is because of ignorance

That they do not me understand.

Those who understand being rare,

I become all the more valuable.

Hence, the sage man wore a coarse tunic,

But carried in his bosom a piece of jade.

Words have an ancestor, deeds have a master.

It is easy to understand my words and practice them.

But all the people in the world do not know them,

And do not practice them.

Since they have knowledge, they do not know me.

When those that know me are few, I am beyond all praise.

Therefore the sage wears coarse woolen clothes but carries jade jewels in his bosom,

He knows himself, but does not present himself,

He loves himself, but does not act arrogantly.

Therefore he rejects the latter and adopts the former.

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to put into practice,

Yet no one in the world can understand them or put them into practice.

Words
have an ancestor and affairs have a sovereign.

It
is because people are ignorant that they fail to understand me.

Those who understand me are few;

Those who harm me are honoured.

Therefore
the sage, while clad in homespun, conceals on his person a priceless piece of
jade.

Difficult to Understand

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to practise, but in the world no one can understand, no one can practise them.

Words have an ancestor; Deeds have a master [viz., Reason]. Since he is not understood, therefore I am not understood. Those who understand me are few, and thus I am distinguished.

Therefore the holy man wears wool, and hides in his bosom his jewels.

The way of the master is simple, and easy to practice. But your mind cannot understand, and you can't try to attain it. Ordinary people are interested in the mundane world, and even if they hear of the Tao they don't grasp its depth. Few and far between are those who follow the way. They realise those who don't follow, aren't ready, so don't try to persuade them. Those who become ready have to lose all hope. Once all hope is lost, there is hope.

My words are easy to understand and easy to put into practice.

But no one in the world understands [my words], and no one puts them into practice.

Words must be principled; actions must be justified.

Because these are not understood, I am not understood.

With few who understand me, fewer will put [my words] into practice.

Thus, a sage dresses simply but bears a jade.

My words are so simple to understand

and so easily put into practice

that no one in all beneath heaven understands them

and no one puts them into practice.

Words have their ancestral origins and actions their sovereign:

it's only because people don't understand this that they don't understand me.

And the less people understand me the more precious I become.

So it is that a sage wears sackcloth, keeping pure jade harbored deep.

My teachings are very easy to understand and very easy to practice.

But the world cannot understand them, nor practice them.

There are:

Principles in my teachings, and

Philosophy governing my undertakings.

Simply because of ignorance, people do not understand me.

Those who do are few, those who practice my teachings are rare.

Thus the sage is clothed in rags but hides a precious jade inside.

My
words

Are very easy to know

Are very easy to practice.

In the world

Noone is able to know

Noone is able to practice.

Words
possess an ancestor

Efforts possess a sovereign.

In
the end only with absence of knowledge

Appropriate lack of self-knowledge happens

Knowledge of that which is the self is rare

And then that which is the self is treasured.

Appropriately
it happens that sages have

A covering of coarse cloth

A bosom of jade.

What I (Lao Zi) teach is easy to understand and to practice, and yet the world neither understands or practices it.

My precepts and procedures derive from a superior principle and procedure, the Principle and its Virtue. The world does not recognize the Principle which directs me, that is why it does not know me. Very few understand me. That makes my glory.

It befalls me to be like the Sage who is unrecognized from amongst the common people because of his humble appearance, even though his interior is filled with jewels.

My words are easy to understand, easy to practice

The world cannot understand, cannot practice

My words have basis

My actions have principle

People do not understand this

Therefore they do not understand me

Those who understand me are few

Thus I am highly valued

Therefore the sage wears plain clothes but holds jade

The concepts I talk about are easy to understand and easy to put into practice, but most people in the world cannot understand them or put them into practice

The concepts I talk about are based on the source of spiritual truth. The actions that I put into practice are based on an overall, ruling principle. People do not understand this unified nature of the Tao, so they fail to understand me.

Those who do understand me are relatively few in number. They are the rare and exceptional individuals. This only increases the value of my words and actions.

The sages - those who really understand and are consistent in thoughts and action - excel quietly, invisibly, unknown to most and misunderstood by those around them. It is as if they wear plain clothes while holding precious jade within. In other words, they assume an unremarkable external appearance and hold spiritual treasures deep in the heart.

THE DIFFICULTY OF UNDERSTANDING

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to put into practice, yet in all the world no one appears to understand them or to practice them.

Words have an ancestor (a preceding idea), deeds have a master (a preceding purpose), and just as these are often not understood, so I am not understood.

They who understand me are very few, and on that account I am worthy of honor. The wise man wears wool (rather than silk) and keeps his gems out of sight.

My words (yen) are very easy to understand (i-chih),

Very easy to put into practice (i-hsing).

But no one under heaven can understand (chih) them,

No one can put them into practice.

Words (yen) have their ruler (chün);

Events (shih) have their progenitor (tsung).

Because people do not understand (chih) this,

Therefore they do not understand me.

Those who understand me are rare,

Those who follow (tsê) my teaching are (preciously) few (kuei).

Therefore the sage wears hair-cloth,

While carrying jade in his breast.

My teachings are easily understood and are readily put into practice yet everyone does not understand them, everyone does not practice them.

Words have specific meanings; actions have specific causes. Not being specific, people do not understand me. Being misunderstood, I understand. Understanding, true knowledge is mine. In this way, the truly wise wear common clothes and carry their jewels in their hearts.

My teachings are very easy to understand

and even easier to put into practice.

And yet, no one understands or practices them.

My teachings are derived from an ancient system of principles.

People who do not realize this do not really know me.

Few know me, but that is my value.

Therefore, the Tao–Master wears rough clothing,

but has a jewel for a heart.

Seventy

My words are easy to understand and easy to perform,

Yet no man under heaven knows them or practices them.

My words have ancient beginnings.

My actions are disciplined.

Because men do not understand, they have no knowledge of me.

Those
that know me are few;

Those that abuse me are honored.

Therefore the sage wears rough clothing and holds the jewel in his heart.

My words are very easy to understand,

And very easy to put into practice,

Yet there should have been no one in the world

Who can understand them

Or can put them into practice.

Words must be purpose-oriented,

Deeds must be reasonably grounded.

People cannot understand me

Because they fail to understand what is said above.

Those who understand me are few;

Those who can follow my advice are even less.

That is why the sage

Is always dressed in coarse cloth

But conceals about him a beautiful piece of jade (the Tao).

My words are very easy to understand,

Very easy to put into practice.

Yet no one under Heaven can understand them

Or put them into practice.

Words have their source,

Deeds have their lord.

Truly, because people don't know this,

They don't understand me.

Those who know me are few;

Those who follow me are rare.

For this reason the sage

Wears coarse cloth but carries jade inside.

Though my words are easily comprehended and easily followed,

People do not understand and do not want to follow.

My words are based on the principles of Dao.

I also follow the same principles in all my dealings.

Because people do not understand my teachings, they fail to understand me as well.

Few people understand me.

Fewer people follow my teachings.

The sage always dresses shabbily but still embraces the treasure in his bosom.

Difficult to Understand

Chih Nan

My teaching is very easy to understand,

And very easy to carry out.

Yet the world is incapable of understanding it,

And incapable of carrying it out.

My teaching has an ancient source,

My practices have a ruling principle.

As people are ignorant of this,

So they fail to understand me.

When those who understand me are few,

Then I am distinguished indeed.

That's why the Sage wears a coarse cotton robe,

To conceal the jade ornament worn on his bosom.

My words are very easy to grasp and very easy to carry out;

Yet few om earth understand them, and few carry them out.

Nevertheless, my words have an ancestor;

My actions have a master.

And because they, my words' ancestors and my actions' master, are not understood, nor shall I be understood.

Those who understand me are but few,

But their fewness does not lessen my worth.

For the Sage goes clothed in coarse and simple garments,

But he wears a jewel hidden in his bosom.

My words are very easy to know,

Very easy to follow.

But beneath-heaven can't know them.

My words have an ancestor;

My deeds have a lord.

People don't know hum,

So they don't know me.

The fewer who know me,

The more honored I am.

The sage wears coarse clothing,

Inside himself hides jade.

My words are very easy to understand and easy to practice,

yet the world can neither understand nor practice them.

My words have only one source: the subtle truth of the universe.

My deeds have only one master: the natural virtue of the universe.

The people of the world have no knowledge of this.

Thus, they have no knowledge of me.

The fewer the persons that know me,

the nobler are they that follow me.

Therefore, the one of whole virtue wears coarse clothes superficially,

but holds a precious treasure within.

LXX.

Difficult
to Know

My
words are most easily known,

Most
easy to practise, too,

But
none in the world my words can know,

And
their practice can pursue.

There s
an Ancestry in my words,

There s
a Head for the things I preach,

But,
because they are all misunderstood,

They know
not what I teach.

The
ones who know me are few,

But
the few who know me prize,

Though
the sage may wear a hair-cloth garb,

The
gem in his bosom lies.

My words are very easily known.

They are very easily practiced.

No one in the world can fully know them,

No one in the world can fully practice them.

My words come from one Source,

My service is to one Ruler.

The Master indeed knows the Inner Kingdom,

That is why he knows the negation of self.

Few there are who know the self.

Because they know it not, they prize the self.

That is why the self-controlled man wears wool.

But in his bosom are jewels.

My words

are very easy

to understand,

and very easy

to practice:

But the civilization today

cannot understand them,

nor practice them

My words have an Ancestor.

My deeds have a Lord.

The people

have no knowledge

of this.

They

have no knowledge

of me.

The fewer persons

know me,

The greater they are

that follow me.

The Complete Thinker

looks like the common man,

While keeping

the Laws of the Universe

and the Power of their application

in his heart.

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to put into practice; but in all the world there is no one who can understand them and can put them into practice.

My words have a system, my actions have a governor.

Indeed, it is just because they are not understood, that men do not understand me.

Those who understand me are rare, those who pattern themselves after me are highly prized.

Thus the Saint wears hair-cloth, but carries jade in his breast.

My words are very easy to know, and very easy to practise; but

there is no one in the world who is able to know and able to practise

them.

There
is an originating and all-comprehending (principle) in my

words, and an authoritative law for the things (which I enforce). It

is because they do not know these, that men do not know me.

They
who know me are few, and I am on that account (the more) to be

prized. It is thus that the sage wears (a poor garb of) hair cloth,

while he carries his (signet of) jade in his bosom.

My
words are easy to understand and very easy to apply.
But no Ego is able to
understand them or apply them.
Words
have authority.
Affairs have a history!
It
is simply because of their ignorance
that Egos do not understand me.

Those who understand me are few, and
thus I am ennobled.
For
this reason, Sages may wear homespun cloth over their shoulders,
but they
carry a jewel beyond price in their heart.

Embarrassingly
obvious

And always near at hand

It is this nothingness you see

But never understand

Though
truth within is ageless

Very few will ever see

My face is what I give to you

The jewel within is me

MY words are very easy to understand, and very easy to practise:

But the world cannot understand them, nor practise them.

My words have an Ancestor.

My deeds have a Lord.

The people have no knowledge of this.

Therefore, they have no knowledge of me.

The fewer persons know me,

The nobler are they that follow me.

Therefore, the Sage wears coarse clothes,

While keeping the jade in his bosom.

My words are very easy to understand.

My teachings are very simple to put into everyday practice.

Yet no one who is tied to the world can understand them.

And if you are chained to the world, you cannot apply them in your life.

My doctrine comes from the source of Nature, my actions have a purpose in accord with the Law.

If you cannot understand this; you cannot understand me.

Because I cannot be understood I am a greater treasure than you know.

This is why the sage wears simple unpretentious clothes,

but his treasures are kept close to him, in his heart.

My words are easy to understand

and easier to put into practice.

Yet no one in the world seems to understand them,

and are not able to apply what I teach.

My
teachings come from the ancients,

the things I do are done for a reason.

Because
you do not know me,

you are not able to understand my teachings.

Because those who know me are few,

my teachings become even more precious.

This way of living and leading groups is easy to understand. It is easy to do.

But not many leaders understand this approach. Very few use it in their work.

Frankly, it is too simple and ancient to attract much attention. As a rule, the greatest interest goes to the greatest novelty.

The wise leader, sticking to the single principle of how everything happens, does nothing new or original.

The wise leader appeals to a very few followers, to those who recognize that traditional wisdom is a treasure which often lies hidden beneath an ordinary appearance.

My words are very easy to understand

And very easy to practice.

Yet the World is not able to understand

Nor able to put them into practice.

My words speak of the primal.

My deeds are but service.

Unless people understand this

They won't understand me.

And since so few understand me,

Then such understanding is rare and valuable indeed.

Therefore the Sage wears common clothes

And hides his treasures only in his heart.

My
words are easy to understand

and easy to put into practice,

but unfortunately few people understand

them or try to live by them.

My
thoughts have always existed,

but since people are confused,

they do not embrace them.

Because people do not understand me,

they are confused in conflict and war

rather than living in peace and harmony.

Those
that acknowledge their

oneness with Infinity are few.

Those that call me crazy

are applauded by others that are

confused.

Therefore,
the sage is modest in her apparel,

but carries the priceless jewel

of peace and harmony in

her heart.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to practice.

The World is unable to understand, unable to practice.

Words have a history, Deeds have a master.

Alas, only because of ignorance am I misunderstood.

Those who understand me are rare.

Those who imitate me are honorable.

Thus does the Wise Man bear rags on his back and Jade in his heart.

Even though my words are easy to understand and easy to put into practice,

No one in the world really knows them or lives by them.

My words have their origin, and my actions receive their impetus, in the source of all things.

If this is not understood, then I am not understood.

Because so few understand my words, they are prized so highly.

Therefore, the Sage appears wearing coarse clothing, concealing the true treasure in his heart.

As it can happen,

What I say is easy to understand and to do,

But none can understand it and do it,

In spite of the fact that what I say has a source

And what I do has a reason.

Since people don't understand what I say and what I do,

They don't know me.

Since people don't know me,

I am special.

That explains why the wise person wears rough clothes

And cherishes a heart of jade.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to practice. No one in the world can understand, No one can practice them.

The words have an ancestor the practice has a master. They just do not understand and so they do not understand me. (So few understand me - a rare treasure indeed.)

And so the Wise Person: Dressed in shabby clothes, jade under his shirt.

My words are easy to understand and realize. Yet many people cannot understand them and cannot realize.

Behind my words, there is the Origin of everything. Since those people do not know It, they do not understand me.

He who cognized Tao is quiet and unnoticeable, though he behaves with dignity. He wears simple clothes and hides the treasure* within.

* Wisdom.

There are few in the world following the Wise One

Who lives and acts with simplicity.

The ordinary person hardly understands the way of the Wise,

Although the facts are evident and logic in their manifestations.

By giving respect and honour to the Wise One,

We become part of his wisdom.

Although
the Wise One might not have expensive apparel,

He might seem not much important,

But his treasure rests in his heart.

My
words are extremely easy to know and extremely easy to put into practice. No
one in the world is able to know them or to put them into operation. [My] sayings
have ancestors, and events have rulers. Now only because they do not know them
do they not (know =) understand me. Those who know me are few, and so I am precious.
For that reason the Sage cloaks himself with a rough garment and holds his jade
to his bosom.

My words are very easily understood, and very easily put into practice.

Yet no one in the world is able to understand and to practice them.

My words have their root; my deeds have their lord.

Just because the people do not know, they do not know me.

Those who know me are few.

Those who emulate me are rare.

Therefore, the Sage wears coarse clothes on the outside,

And bears precious jade near his breast.

Knowing the Tao

My words are very easy to know,

Very easy to follow.

Yet the world is unable to know them,

Unable to follow them.

My words have a source,

My efforts have mastery.

Indeed, since none know this,

They do not know me.

The rare ones who know me

Must treasure me.

Therefore, Evolved Individuals

Wear a coarse cloth covering

With precious jade at the center.

Try to practice what was said here and you might as well pour your entire vessel of water into the teacup. These words are garbage. Forget them. Look in your heart to understand.

My words are easy just to understand:

To live by them is very easy too;

Yet it appears that none in all the world

Can understand or make them come to life.

My
words have ancestors, my works a prince;

Since none know this, unknown I too remain.

But honor comes to me when least I'm known:

The Wise Man, with a jewel in his breast,

Goes clad in garments made of shoddy stuff.

My words are very easy to understand, and very easy to practice.

But no one under Heaven is able to understand them or to practice them.

Speeches should have their main principle,

And deeds should have their master.

Because of their ignorance, the people are not able to understand me.

Those who are able to understand me are very few,

And those who are able to follow me are very heard to meet.

Therefore the sage (who is not understood) looks like he is wearing coarse grab, but he has a precious jade in his heart.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to practice, yet none among all under Heaven can understand them, and none can practice them.

My words have a progenitor, and my undertakings have a sovereign.

It is just because there is no understanding of this that they do not understand me.

As long as those who understand me are rare, someone like me is precious.

Thus it is that the sage wears coarse woolen cloth but harbors jade in his bosom.

1. My words are easy to understand,

2. And easy to put into practice.

3. Yet no one in the world can understand them,

4. And no one can put them into practice.

5. Now my words have an ancestor, and my deeds have a lord,

6. And it's simply because [people] have no understanding [of them], that they
therefore don't understand me.

7. But when those who understand me are few, then I'm of great value.

8. Therefore the Sage wears coarse woolen cloth, but inside it he holds on to
jade.

Lao Tzu's advice

was easy to understand

and easy to follow.

But nobody understood him

or did what he suggested.

His words

stemmed from ancient wisdom,

and his actions were highly disciplined.

People didn't get that,

which is why

they didn't understand him.

And the less they understood him,

the more meaningful his advice became.

That's why the
Masters live simply,

hiding their wisdom deep within themselves.

.

My Ideas Are Easy

My ideas are easy to understand and easy to practice.

Yet no one understands them or practices them.

My ideas have a source; my actions have a master.

Because people do not understand this, they do not know me.

Since few know me, I am very precious.

Therefore the wise wear coarse clothes

and keep the jewel inside.

My words are easy to understand still easier to practice and yet they are seldom understood still more seldom practiced.

My words originate in the primordial source and follow the primordial law.

One who does not know this misjudges me.

It is to my honor that few there are who recognize me and understand me.

An awakened man does not shine outside but inside he is Light.

They Know Me Not

Lao Tze says,

My words are very easy to know and very easy to practice;

but there is no one in the world who is able to know and able to practice them.

In my words there is a traditional precept and a ruling art.

It is because that they do not know these, that men do not know me.

That is why there are few that know me, and there are even fewer that model after me.

There is a sage who wears coarse clothes and hides jade in his bosom, which anyone shall see.

HIDDEN IDENTITY

Though
the words of the sage are simple,

and his actions easily performed,

they are few among many,

who can speak or act as a sage.

For
the ordinary man it is difficult

to know the way of a sage,

perhaps because his words

are from the distant past,

and his actions naturally disposed.

Those
who know the way of the sage

are few and far between,

but those who treat him with honesty,

will be honoured by him and the Tao.

He
knows he makes no fine display,

and wears rough clothes, not finery.

It is not in his expectancy of men

that they should understand his ways,

for he carries his jade within his heart.

My teachings are easy to understand

and easy to put into practice.

Yet your intellect will never grasp them,

and if you try to practice them, you'll fail.

My teachings are older than the
world.

How can you grasp their meaning?

If you want to know me,

look inside your heart.

My teaching is very easy to be understood and very easy to be followed,

Yet very few people in the world can understand and follow it.

My teaching is to trace the origin of all things and my service is to serve the fundamentals of Nature.

If one does not understand Nature, surely, he cannot understand me.

If I am known only by a few, I feel envious of it.

Therefore, the Sage ruler even wore coarse clothes but embraced his jadelike personality.

My words are easy to understand and easy to apply.

Yet no one in the world can understand them and no one could apply them.

Words have their origin, and events have their leader.

Only because of prevailing ignorance am I not understood.

The fewer who understand me, the more precious I am.

So the sage wears shabby cloth, but holds a treasure within.

LXX

These
words are easy to remember and easy to practice

Yet few remember them when they are needed, and fewer practice them

This is because these words are rooted in principles that go beyond words

Saying them is not enough

For those few who practice them, though, they are of great value

They may look plain, but they lead to the wealth of the heart

My Sayings Are Very Easy to Recognize

My sayings are very easy to recognize,

and very easy to apply.

But no one in the world can recognize them,

and no one can apply them.

Sayings have a source,

events have a leader.

It Is only through ignorance

that I am not known.

Those who know me are rare;

those who emulate me are noble.

This is why sages dress plainly,

and conceal what is precious.

My words are easy to understand and easy to practice.

However, people in the world rarely understand and practice them.

The words have their origins.

The events have their causes.

People can hardly understand this.

Therefore they rarely understand me.

Few people understand me.

Those who do follow me are prized.

This is why sages dress in crude clothes but carry jades.

My words are very easy to understand, and very easy to practice.

But the world cannot understand them, nor practice them.

My words have a root.

My deeds have a lord.

Because people are not aware of this, they do not understand me.

Those who understand me are few, those who follow me are honored.

Therefore, the sage wears coarse clothes, while keeping the jade in his bosom.

My words are easy to be understood and easy to be carried out.

Yet no man understands them or practices them.

My words have ancient beginnings.

My ways are disciplined.

Because men are ignorant,

they could not understand my ways.

Those who know me are few;

who despise me are honored.

Therefore the sage wears rough clothing (looks dumb),

yet holds the jade (truth) in his heart.

My words are easy to understand

and easy to put into practice.

Yet no one under heaven understands them

or puts them into practice.

My
words have an ancestor. My actions are governed.

Because
people do not understand this

they do not understand me.

Those who understand me are few.

Those who follow me should be respected.

Therefore,
the True Person wears homespun clothes

and carries jade in the heart.

These
words of mine

are easy to translate and understand and discuss and practice.

So why is it

nobody anywhere

understands them? practices them?

My
words

have culture, have reason, have a system

but try to make sense of them and you will fail,

try to apply them like rules and you will fail.

This is why people do not understand

my words.

So
few understand it

but then

that is its value

guarded like

a pond

frozen

in the winter.

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to put into practice. Yet
no one understands them; no one puts them into practice.

But some of my teaching could have nature as a source, and also there's a principle-ruled
ancestry in some of my words.

Yes, [some of] my deeds have a lord; my deeds could have [right] dao as sovereign.

Most men don't understand this, they're unable to understand me.

Few
people understand me, and on this my real value depends. I am highly valued,
for few understand me.

The wise man wears a coarse cloth on top and carries jade underneath his dress,
within his bosom.

My words are very easy to understand, very easy to practice.

But no one is able to understand them,

And no one is able to practice them.

Words have authority.

Affairs have an ancestry.

It is simply because of their ignorance, that they do not understand me;

Those who understand me are few, thus I am ennobled.

For this reason,

The sage wears coarse clothing over his shoulders, but carries jade within his bosom.

Easy are my words to know, and also to practice.

Yet none is able to understand nor yet to practice them.

For there is a remote origin for my words, and a supreme law for my actions.

Not knowing these, men cannot know me.

Those who know me are few, and by them I am esteemed.

For the wise man is outwardly poor, but he carries his jewel in his bosom.

You Must Be Able to Taste Your Love

Working out the details

of daily life together

is a proper function of the mind.

But your real experience of each other

is a product of your senses.

It is as tangible as a kiss.

You must be able to taste your love

as you would taste a ripe strawberry.

Touch more—gentle touches, passionate touches,

and comforting touches.

Kiss more—soft kisses, demanding kisses, and healing kisses.

Hear more—sounds of books read aloud, sounds of heartbeats,

and sounds of sharing.

See more—sparkle of eyes, texture of skin, and subtle movements.

Smell more—aromas of meals, fragrance of flowers,

and the familiar scent of each other's skin.

My doctrines are easy to understand and very easy to practice, But none in the world can understand or practice them.

My doctrines have a source (Nature); my deeds have a master (Tao). It
is because people do not understand this that they do not understand me.
Few people know me, and therefore I am highly valued.

Therefore the sage wears a coarse cloth on top and carries jade within his bosom.

My way is so
simple to feel, so easy to apply,

That only a few will feel it or apply it.

If it were not the lasting way, the natural way to try,

If it were a passing way, everyone would try it.

But however few shall go my way

Or feel concerned with me,

Some there are and those are they

Who witness what they see:

Sanity is a haircloth sheath

With a jewel underneath.

My teaching is very easy to understand and very easy to practice.

However, in this world, no one understands it and no one practices it.

Your speech must be based on facts, your actions must follow principles.

Only because people do not understand the DAO, do they not understand me.

Few people know my teaching; even fewer people follow my cause.

Therefore, the great men wore coarse clothing, but hid treasures inside.

My words are very easy to understand and very easy to practice,

Yet the people of the world can neither understand nor practice them.

My words point to a source and my deeds a master,

Yet the people of the world know neither the source nor the master.

Thus, they know not who and what I am.

But for the few who know, I am precious.

Therefore, the sage may wear coarse clothes,

But will always hold a luminous treasure within.

As it can happen,

What I say is easy to understand and to do,

But none can understand it and do it,

In spite of the fact that what I say has a source

And what I do has a reason.

Since people don't understand what I say and what I do,

They don't know me.

Since people don't know me,

I am special.

That explains why the wise person wears rough clothes

And cherishes a heart of jade.

My words are very easy to understand.

My teachings are very simple to put into everyday practice.

Yet no one who is tied to the world can understand them.

And if you are chained to the world, you cannot apply them in your life.

My doctrine comes from the source of Nature, my actions have a purpose in accord with the Law.

If you cannot understand this; you cannot understand me.

Because I cannot be understood I am a greater treasure than you know.

This is why the sage wears simple unpretentious clothes,

but his treasures are kept close to him, in his heart.

