===== Chapter 61 =====

That kingdom that is great

Is modest and flowing:

The intersection of the world.

The female of the world.

The female, always by means of gentleness, overcomes the male.

Therefore, [being] gentle is being modest.

Therefore:

The great kingdom, by means of modesty [toward] the small kingdom

Receives the small kingdom.

The small kingdom, by means of modesty [toward] the great kingdom

Receives the great kingdom.

Therefore:

Some are modest in order to receive.

Some are modest and are received.

The great kingdom does not inordinately desire

To annex livestock and people.

The small kingdom does not inordinately desire

To come into the service of people.

[So that] they both get what each one desires

That which is the great [kingdom] should become modest.

A great nation flows down To be the world's pool, The female under
heaven In stillness The female constantly overcomes the male, In
stillness Takes the low place.

Therefore a great nation Lowers itself And wins over a small one. A small nation keeps itself low And wins over a great one.

Sometimes becoming low wins, Sometimes staying low wins.

A great nation desires nothing more Than to unite and protect people. A
small nation desires nothing more Than to enter the service of people.

When both get what they wish The great one should be low.

A big country is like a low-lying land.

It's like the meeting ground of the world.

It's like the female of the world.

The female always defeats the male with calmness.

Because she is calm, she remains low.

Thus if the big country is below the small country

It conquers the small country.

And if the small country is below the big country

It conquers the big country.

Thus some win by becoming low

And some win by remaining low.

What the big country wants

Is to unite people and nourish them.

What the small country wants

Is to serve people and find shelter for them.

Both can get what they want

If it's the big country that becomes low.

THE YIELDING NATION

A great nation, like a river delta,

Receives the riches of the land.

In being receptive - possessing the Yin,

Receiving the Yang unto it,

Overcomes all by its very peacefulness and quietude.

So -

A great nation, placing itself below a lesser,

Absorbs the lesser.

A lesser nation, submitting to a greater,

Conquers and wins adherence of the greater.

Thus -

To absorb, conquer and win adherence,

- One must yield.

Truly -

Those who triumph, do so by yielding.

A great nation prospers by absorbing,

A lesser by joining and participating.

For both to so benefit,

the greater nation needs be a yielding nation.

A great state lies below the river and unites with Heaven below (the sacred body).

Heaven below is female.

The female is eternal and tranquil which sustains the male.

Through peacefulness and acting below, a great country has the means to receive a petty country.

Thus they can govern a petty country.

By means of being below, a great country thus governs itself.

The capacity to be below is the means to govern.

A great country's tendency is to unite and nourish the people.

A petty country's tendency is to penetrate the people's activities.

Above all, they both have a tendency.

For the great it is proper to act below.

THE MODESTY OF THE THE

A state becometh powerful when it resembleth a great river, deep-seated;

to it tend all the small streams under Heaven.

It
is as with the female, that conquereth the male by her Silence.

Silence is a form of Gravity.

Thus
a great state attracteth small states by meeting their views, and

small states attract the great state by revering its eminence. In the

first case this Silence gaineth supporters; in the second, favour.

The
great state uniteth men and nurtureth them; the small state wisheth

the good will of the great, and offereth service; thus each gaineth its

advantage. But the great state must keep Silence.

What makes a great state is its being (like) a low- lying, down-flowing(stream);-it becomes the centre to which tend (all the small states) underheaven. (To illustrate from) the case of all females:-the female alwaysovercomes the male by her stillness. Stillness may be considered (a sortof) abasement. Thus it is that a great state, by condescending to smallstates, gains them for itself; and that small states, by abasing themselvesto a great state, win it over to them. In the one case the abasement leadsto gaining adherents, in the other case to procuring favour. The greatstate only wishes to unite men together and nourish them; a small stateonly wishes to be received by, and to serve, the other. Each gets whatis desires, but the great state must learn to abase itself.

When mankind lives in peace,

There will be no superiors and inferiors

It is like a big river,

In which all side currents have come to rest

The wildness comes to rest in peacefulness,

Because it is calm and most lowly

One who is the least by his disarming simplicity,

Is therefore appealing to his fellow men

And so it's a benefit for both of them

So one who looks big, has to become small again

To be great, a state must be passively receptive, like the ocean which accepts whatever the rivers bring into it, or like the feminine which always submits to the masculine. Recall how the female always overcomes the male by means of her passivity. Passivity is submissiveness.

Thus the great state places itself at the service of a small state before before it absorbs the small state. And a small state must serve the interests of the great state before it can be taken into the great state.

Hence, some submit in order to take, while others submit in order to be taken.

When a great state desires to have more people, and a small state desires to be protected,

it is by submission that both obtain what they desire.

A large kingdom must be like the low ground towards which all streams flows down.

It must be a point towards which all things under heaven converge.

Its part must be that of the female in its dealings with all things under heaven.

The female by quiescence conquers the male; by quiescence gets underneath.

If a large kingdom can in the same way succeed in getting underneath a small kingdom

Then it will win the adherence of the small kingdom;

And it is because small kingdoms are by nature in this way underneath large kingdoms

That they win the adherence of large kingdoms.

The one must get underneath in order to do it;

The other is underneath and therefore does it.

(What large countries really need is more inhabitants;

And what small countries need is some place

Where their surplus inhabitants can go and get employment.)

Thus each gets what it needs.

That is why I say the large kingdom must "get underneath".

A country becomes great by lying low,

like the delta of a great river.

The confluence of the realm.

The mother of the world.

The female conquers the male by stillness.

Being still, she takes the lower position.

A great country conquers a small country

by taking the lower position.

A small country conquers a great country

by merging with it.

Thus, the great country conquers by yielding,

the small country conquers by being absorbed.

The great country needs more people.

The small country needs greater purpose.

Each gets what it needs.

It is proper for greatness to yield.

The great realm is the one which flows beneath

A confluence to (all) under heaven

A woman to (all) under heaven

The feminine, ever through stillness, overcomes the male

Through stillness & playing submissive

And so a great realm, by submitting to a small realm,

Will then appropriate the small realm

A small realm, by submitting to a great realm,

Will then appropriate the great realm

And so the one submits, intending to appropriate

The other submits and gets taken in

(Where) the great realm has no greater ambition

than uniting & caring for others

(And) the small realm has no greater ambition

than joining & serving others

Then both of these each gets what it wants

(And) the great one should act to submit

International relations

A large state is like the lower part of a river.

It is the female of the world.

It is the meeting point of the world.

The female constantly overcomes

The male with tranquility.

Because she is tranquil,

Therefore she is fittinly underneath.

The large state - if it is below the small state,

Then it takes over the small state.

The small state - if it is below the large state,

Then it is taken over by the large state.

Therefore some by being low take over,

And some by being low are teken over.

Therefore a large state merely desires

To unite and rear others;

While the small state desires

To enter and te serve others.

If both get what they want,

Then the large state should

Fittingly be underneath.

A great country is like a low-lying land into which many streams flow. It draws powerful energies to it as a receptive woman draws an eager man. The feminine can always conquer the masculine by yielding and taking the lower position. In this way she becomes as low-lying land: in time, everything comes her way.

Therefore a great country can win over a small country by practicing humility. A small country can also win over a great country by practicing humility.

One wins by willingly taking the lower position. The other wins by willingly acknowledging its lower position.

The great country wants to embrace and nourish more people. The small country wants to ably serve its benefactor.

Both accomplish their ends by yielding.

How does a great nation know its neighbors?

As a river modestly accepts its feeding streams;

As a woman blissfully receives the man she loves.

The way of Nature is attraction:

Pure strength rests below,

And thus absorbs what lies above.

Genuine love receives its complement;

The greatest nation yields.

Small and great are mutually fulfilling:

Set them into opposition,

And you have made your first and final error.

Therefore, let your nation follow Nature's way:

If it is big, let its actions be small.

If it is small, it is already complete,

So it need not strive for greatness.

In the service of the Cosmic Teacher,

Borders and boundaries, fences and flags

Have no meaning.

In this there is benefit for all.

Thus among both hearts and nations:

If you would discover the great,

You must look first below.

All sense of territory is the mark of ego, and is repugnant to the cosmic order. Thus the poet declares that "borders and boundaries, fences and flags" are meaningless to one who follows the Sage: this applies to both "hearts and nations"—individuals and entire civilizations.

Here, a personal meditation image may help to illustrate Lao Tzu's point. It is a meditation that I have sometimes wished I could offer to members of the armed forces. It is very simple: you close your eyes and take a space flight, journeying out to an orbiting distance of the earth. Then, as many astronauts have done—often in a transformational experience, as was the case with Edgar Mitchell—you look back onto the earth and see both what is there, and what is not. Water and clouds, light and shadow, earthen colors of varying hues, from tawny mountain to verdant plain, all appear to the eye. But no borders, walls, fortresses, or other emblems of territory are seen from this distance. In such a setting, the Cosmos is seen to lack a sense of power, and the superficial paradigm of the universe as a mechanical system is annihilated and transformed: things in motion appear to rest in stillness, while the Whole, in this suspension, seems to dance with small, unceasing movement. But perhaps the most significant part of the meditation is the return to earth, where the perspective thus received is brought back into contact with a chair, a room, and light through a window. It is here, rather than in the "space flight" that the transformation is revealed; it is back on earth where the discovery occurs that, as Lao Tzu says, "pure strength rests below, and absorbs what lies above."

The Tao of Statecraft

A
great nation is one to which the streams descend.

It is the meeting place, the female of the world.

Quiet, passive, leading the male by humble submission.

A
great nation lowers itself to the smaller

and thus wins the smaller nation.

A smaller nation lowers itself beneath the greater

and thus wins the greater nation.

So, some lower themselves to win others;

some are already low, and therefore win others.

A
great nation wants more people;

a small nation wants more room.

When both are dedicated to these ends,

the greater nation should humbly yield.

A great country is lowly. Everything under heaven blends with it. It is like the female, which at all times and in every place overcomes the male by her quietude. Than quietude there is nothing that is more lowly.

Therefore a great state gains the smaller state by yielding; while the smaller state wins the greater by submission. In the one case lowliness gains adherents, in the other it procures favours.

For a strong state there is no safer ambition than to desire to gather men and care from them; and for the weaker state there is nothing better than the ambition to become an indispensable servant.

When each obtains what each desires the strongest should be the humblest.

A great state is the worlds low-stream (to which all the river flows [sic] down), the world's field and the world's female. The female always conquers the male by quietude, which is employed as a means to lower oneself. Thus a great state lowers itself towards a small state before it takes over the small state. A small state lowers itself towards a great state before it takes over the great state. Therefore some lower themselves to take, while some lower themselves to gather. A great state wishes nothing more than to have and keep many people, and a small state wishes nothing more than to get more things to do. When the two both mean to obtain their wishes, the greater one should lower itself.

Virtuosity at Using 'Beneath'

Those which are great states flow downward.

The interchanges in the social world!

The female of the social world!

The female constants using stillness. She conquer the male

using stillness to act out 'beneath'.

Hence if great states use 'beneath' on small states,

then they take small states.

If small states use 'beneath' on great states,

then they take great states.

Hence some 'beneath' in order to take,

some 'beneath' and then take.

Great states simply desire universally domesticating people.

Small states simply desire serving people.

So of the two, each gets what it wants.

The great fittingly deems 'beneath'.

A greater nation must be humble and like a reservoir

Where all the waters join together.

It is the passivity of the universe.

Passivity always prevails over activity through quiescence.

Quiescence is humble before activity.

When a greater nation is humble before a lesser nation,

It prevails over the lesser nation.

When a lesser nation is humble before a greater nation,

It prevails over the greater nation.

Thus, by being humble one prevails over others.

Or, by being originally in a lower position,

One prevails over others.

A greater nation simply likes to bring people together

And to nurture them.

A lesser nation simply likes to participate

And work together with others.

In this way, both have what they like,

But the greater nation must be humble.

When a large country is like water,

which runs towards lower places,

all the other countries will unite with it.

In the unity of the world, the female always overcomes the male with stillness.

The stillness is akin to the lower position - that is how a large country can be respected by a small country and conquer it.

And if a small country takes the lower position and allows itself to be influenced by the large country, the small can conquer the large.

That is why by being lower to take, or lower to be taken,

a large country only tries to annex a small one and a small country only tries to protect its people.

They both find what they want.

Therefore it is fitting for a large country to be the lower one.

A large state is the lower stream,

The female to all under heaven,

The converging point of all under heaven.

The female constantly uses stillness

To overcome the male.

As she is still,

It is proper that she stay low.

Therefore, if a large state

Stays low to a small state,

It wins the small state;

If a small state

Stays low to a large state,

It is won by the large state.

Therefore, one stays low to win;

One stays low to be won.

Therefore, the large state

Merely wishes to annex and feed the other;

The small state

Merely wishes to join and serve the other.

If each is to have its wish,

The large state should stay lower.

Govern a large country as you would cook a small fish, gently.

Let the Tao govern the world, and spirits will not roam freely.

This does not mean that spirits will not have powers,

But rather that their powers will not harm people.

They will not harm people,

Nor will the sage harm people.

When neither he nor they harm anybody,

The virtue belongs to both of them.

When the Tao governs the world, the spirits are not known as spirits and the sage is not considered a sage, says Wang-Pi.

A large state is the lower reaches of a river:

The place where all the streams of the world unite.

In
the union of the world,

The female always gets the better of the male by stillness.

Being
still, she takes the lower position.

Hence
the large state, by taking the lower position, annexes the small state;

The small state, by taking the lower position, affiliates itself to the large
state.

Thus
the one, by taking the lower position, annexes;

The other, by taking the lower position, is annexed.

All that the large state wants is to take the other under its wing;

All that the small state wants is to have its services accepted by the other.

If each of the two wants to find its proper place,

It is meet that the large should take the lower position.

The Virtue of Humility

A great state, one that lowly flows, becomes the empire's union, and the empire's wife.

The wife always through quietude conquers her husband, and by quietude renders herself lowly.

Thus a great state through lowliness toward small states will conquer the small states, and small states through lowliness toward great states will conquer great states.

Therefore some render themselves lowly for the purpose of conquering; others are lowly and therefore conquer.

A great state desires no more than to unite and feed the people; a small state desires no more than to devote itself to the service of the people; but that both may obtain their wishes, the greater one must stoop.

A great master is prepared for nothing, so is ready for anything. He trusts in the Tao and accepts he cannot control its movement. Realising its greatness, he serves it. Thus he is humble and feminine. Humble and feminine, he allows himself to be nourished by the Tao. Being nourished by the Tao, he himself becomes great. Greatness can only be achieved through humility.

A great nation is like a down-stream - the feminine to the world, the rendezvous of the world.

The feminine frequently wins over the masculine with serenity.

Serenity is obsequiousness.

Thus,

a great nation, obsequious to a small nation, gains the small nation;

a small nation, obsequious to a great nation, gains the great nation.

Thus, one is obsequious in order to gain.

Or, one is obsequious because it needs to gain.

A great nation is not to be too keen on conquering.

A small nation is not to be too keen on acquiescing.

Since each gains what each desires, it is better for the great nation to be obsequious.

A great nation flows down into

the place where all beneath heaven converges,

the female of all beneath heaven.

In its stillness, female lies perpetually low, and there perpetually conquers male.

A great nation that puts itself below a small nation takes over the small nation,

and a small nation that puts itself below a great nation gives itself over to the great nation.

Some lie low to take over, and some lie low to give over.

A great nation wanting nothing more than to unite and nurture the people and a small nation wanting nothing more than to join and serve the people: they both succeed in what they want.

Great things lie low and rest content.

A big state is like the downstream of a river, where the world converges, and which functions as the female

of the world.

The female always overcomes the male through stillness.

Stillness means lying low.

Therefore,

When a big state places itself below a small state,

It gains the trust of the small state;

When a small state places itself below a big state,

It gains the confidence of the big state.

Thus:

Sometimes a state lies low in order to gain,

Sometimes a state lying low results in gain.

A big state wishes only to dominate and lead,

A small state desires only to join and follow.

Now that each of the two gets what is wants,

It would still be better for the big state to lie low.

Those
which are great nations flow and spread lower

The intersection of the world

The female of the world.

The
female entirely conquers the male through stillness

It happens that stillness acts lower.

So
when a great nation is lower than a tiny nation

It next grabs the tiny nation

When a tiny nation is lower than a great nation

It next grabs the great nation.

So
some are lower and it happens they grab

Some are lower and yet they grab.

Without
fail a great nation desires to bring together and rear others

Without fail a tiny nation desires to enter into the efforts of others.

In
the end for both of these to acquire their desired position

Those which are great appropriately act low.

If a great state lowers itself, like those holes in which water accumulates, everyone will come to it. It will belike the universal female. In her apparent passivity and inferiority, the female is superior to the male (for it is she who gives birth).

On condition of knowing how to lower itself, a great state will win over lesser states,

which in their turn, will lower themselves, seeking its protection.

For this to be realized, only one thing is needed, but it is essential. It is that the great state deigns to lower itself before the lesser ones. (if it is proud and hard, there is no hope).

The large country is like the lowest river

The converging point of the world

The receptive female of the world

The female always overcomes the male with serenity

Using serenity as the lower position

Thus if the large country is lower than the small country

Then it can take the small country

If the small country is lower than the large country

Then it can be taken by the large country

Thus one uses the lower position to take

The other uses the lower position to be taken

The large country only wishes to gather and protect people

The small country only wishes to join and serve people

So that both obtain what they wish

The larger one should assume the lower position

In this chapter Lao Tzu points out that the virtue of humility applies not only to individuals and personal interactions, but also to diplomacy and international relations. In fact, the microcosm of the personal reflects the macrocosm of the national, so principles that work in one level operate equally well in the other.

Thus, we can see this chapter not only as sage advice to sovereign states, but also to all of us. In the context of everyday living, the large country would be someone who has more power, while the small country would be someone with less. Because everything is relative, we can oftentimes be called upon to play either role. For instance, a mid-level manager can be a small country to senior executives, and at the same time be a large country to the rank and file.

The large country may be quite powerful and has a lot more resources than small countries, but if it does not understand or practice the virtue of humility, it will quickly devolve from a well-respected world leader to a despised empire. History shows clearly that empires come and go, and when an empire falls, the smaller countries that used to cower at its feet will suddenly rise up against it.

When we apply this idea to the individual level, we see the wisdom of treating people well on one's way up - because it is indeed true that one will see all of them again on one's way down.

THE TEH OF HUMILITY

A great state that is useful is like a bond of unity within the Empire; it is the Empire's wife.

The female controls the male by her quietude and submission. Thus a great state by its service to smaller states wins their allegiance. A small state by submission to a great state wins an influence over them. Thus some stoop to conquer, and others stoop and conquer.

Great states can have no higher purpose than to federate states and feed the people. Small states can have no higher purpose than to enter a federation and serve the people. Both alike, each in his own way, gain their end, but to do so, the greater must practice humility.

A large state is down stream (hsia liu).

Where the rivers under heaven (t'ien hsia) converge,

Is the female (p'in) under heaven.

The female always wins the male (mou) by stillness (ching),

By stillness it is low-lying (hsia).

Therefore, by being low-lying (hsia) to a small state,

A large state acquires (ch'ü) a small state.

By lowering (hsia) itself to a large state,

A small state acquires a large state.

The one acquires by being low-lying (hsia),

The other acquires by lowering (hsia).

A large state without overstepping its boundary (pu kuo),

Wishes to keep others under its wings.

A small state without overstepping its boundary (pu kuo),

Wishes to offer service to others.

Now both are granted their proper wishes,

It is fitting that a large state takes the low (hsia) place.

The Tao of Statecraft

A great nation is one to which the streams descend. It is the meeting place, the female of the world. Quiet, passive, overcoming the male ba humble submission.

A great nation lowers itself to the smaller and thus wins the smaller nation; a smaller nation lowers itself beneath the greater and thus wins the greater nation. So, some lower themselves to win others; some are already low, and therefore win others.

A great nation wants more people; a small nation wants more room. When both are dedicated to these ends, the greater nation should humbly yield.

A great country is like a sea into which all streams flow,

the Female of the world.

The Female overcomes the Male with stillness.

The woman overcomes the man by lying underneath him.

Therefore, a great country dominates a small country by submitting to it;

and a small country can dominate a great country by submitting to it.

Yield and conquer.

A great country wants to unite and shelter people.

A small country wants to come in and be sheltered.

Each gets what it wants.

Thus, the great country should yield.

Sixty-one

A great country is like low land.

It is the meeting ground of the universe,

The mother of the universe.

The female overcomes the male with stillness,

Lying low in stillness.

Therefore
if a great country gives way to a smaller country,

It will conquer the smaller country.

And if a small country submits to a great country,

It can conquer the great country.

Therefore those who would conquer must yield,

And those who conquer do so because they yield.

A
great nation needs more people;

A small country needs to serve.

Each gets what it wants.

It is fitting for a great nation to yield.

A large state should play the role of female,

Just like the lowest reaches of a river

Where all the other streams meet.

The female always conquers the male by motionlessness,

Because the motionless female always takes the lower position.

Hence the large state can annex the small one by taking the lower position (being modest);

The small state can gain the trust of the large one by taking the lower position,

The case being either the former or vice versa.

The large state wants to put the small one under its protection,

The small state wants to be shielded by the large one,

Thus both can satisfy their wishes,

But the large state should be more willing to take the lower position.

The large state is the lower reaches of a river,

The place where all under Heaven meets -

The female of all under Heaven.

The female always overcomes the male by stillness.

With stillness she plays the lower part.

Therefore, when the large state plays the lower part toward the small state,

It takes the small state.

When the small state plays the lower part toward the large state,

It takes the large state.

Therefore some take by playing the lower part;

Some are taken by playing the lower part.

The large state merely wants to unite with the other and nurture it;

The small state merely wants to join and serve the other.

Each gets what it wants.

It is right that the large state should play the lower part.

When a great nation takes a low profile, it becomes the hub of small nations.

Dao is the world's mystic female.

The mystic female triumphs over the male by her quietude.

Her characteristics are quietude and humility.

If the larger nation is humble, it will gain the trust of the smaller nations and absorb them.

By being compliant, the smaller nations will gain protection from the larger nation.

Both need to take a lowly position to gain control or to be protected.

The large nation aims to embrace and expand.

The smaller nation wishes to gain protection and to prosper.

Although they both aim to achieve their respective objectives, the larger nation should still take the lower profile.

Virtue of Humility

Ch'ien Teh

A great country should assume a low position.

Being the hub of the world,

It should play the part of the Female.

The Female always employs quiescence

To subdue the Male, and takes a low position.

Therefore, a big country, stooping low,

Will win over a small country;

And a small country, staying low,

Will win over a big country.

Therefore, some stoop low to conquer,

And some stay low to conquer.

What a big country wants is merely

To absorb and support more people;

What a small country wants is merely

To enter a big country to offer services.

For each of the two to get what it wants,

The big country, therefore, should be lowly.

A great kingdom is like the low-running stream to which all rivers flow down: the centre towards which all

converge.

It plays the female part.

The female overcomes the male by quiescence: she puts herself beneath the male.

Similarly, a great kingdom that puts itself beneath a small kingdom gains the adherence of the smaller;

A small kingdom, because in the natural order of things it is below a great kingdom, gains the adherence of the

greater.

The one gains by becoming lowly and putting itself beneath, the other gains by being naturally lowly.

Thus: if the great kingdom desires only to add to the population it already nourishes,

And the small kingdom desires only to unite and serve,

Then both of them assume the positions they desire.

But it is the greater of the two that should seek the lowly position.

A great country is one that downward flows

To be the confluence of all beneath heaven

And beneath-heaven's female.

For the feminine overcomes the masculine

By quietude and lowliness.

Hence,

By lowering itself before a small country,

A great country wins over a small country.

By lowering itself before a large country,

A small country wins over a large country.

The one wins by lowering itself,

The other by keeping itself lowered.

Great countries wish nothing more

Than to shelter others:

Small countries with nothing more

Than to be sheltered.

Since each gets its wish,

The great country ought to make itself lower.

A great country is like the lower regions of a river: a place where all the streams of the world unite.

She is the mother of the world.

The peaceful and feminine always overpowers the masculine.

Being peaceable, one takes the lower position.

Hence, if a great country can lower itself to greet a small country,

it will win the friendship and trust of the small country.

If a small country can lower itself to greet a great country,

it will win the friendship and support of the great country.

One wins by taking the lower position,

while the other wins by remaining low.

Thus, if each is to find its proper place,

the one that is great must place itself low and offer help.

LXI.

Virtue
of Yielding

A
great state is like a great river,

Downflowing
with movement and life,

Of
all under heaven the union,

Of
all under heaven the wife.

Consider
the female, the woman

Overcomes
by her quietude wholly,

Some
make themselves lowly to conquer,

Some
conquer because they are lowly.

And
so a great state condescending

Will win smaller states to unite,

And
small states, themselves by abasement

Will
conquer far more than by fight.

If
the great state desire but to nourish,

And
the small to preserve and extend,

Then
each has secured what it sought for,

But
to do this the great one must bend.

A great kingdom, lowly like running water, is the Meeting-place of the world.

It is the feminine quality of the world.

The feminine quality always overcomes the masculine by stillness.

In order to be still, we must become lowly.

Therefore, if a great kingdom is lowly towards a little kingdom it will take possession of the little kingdom.

If a little kingdom is lowly towards a great kingdom it will take possession of the great kingdom.

So one becomes lowly in order to conquer,

The other is lowly and yet it conquers.

If a great kingdom only desires to unify and nourish men,

If a small kingdom only desires to enter in and serve men,

Then the Master, in each case, shall obtain his desire.

He who is great ought to be lowly.

A great Country

is like the lowland

to which all streams flow.

It is the lake

of all under heaven,

the Feminine of the world.

The Feminine

always conquers

the Masculine

by her quietness,

by lowering herself

through her quietness.

If a great country

can lower itself

before a small country,

it will win over

the small country;

and if a small country

can lower itself

before a great country,

it will win over

the great country.

The one wins

by lowering itself;

the other,

by remaining low.

What a great country wants

is simply

to accept more people;

and what a small country wants

is simply

to serve its protector.

Each gets what it wants.

But it benefits

a great country

to lower itself.

A great state is downstream. It is the converging point (of the water) of All-under-heaven. It is the female of All-under-heaven. The female always overcomes the male by stillness; by stillness she is underneath.

Therefore, by getting beneath a little state, a great state gains a little one, and by abasing itself to a great state, a little state gains a big one. The one gains by becoming low, the other by being low. A great state only wishes to unite men and feed them; a little state only wishes to be received and to serve others. So that each shall get what is wishes, the great must become low.

What makes a great state is its being (like) a low-lying, down-

flowing (stream);--it becomes the centre to which tend (all the small

states) under heaven.

(To
illustrate from) the case of all females:--the female always

overcomes the male by her stillness. Stillness may be considered (a

sort of) abasement.

Thus
it is that a great state, by condescending to small states,

gains them for itself; and that small states, by abasing themselves to

a great state, win it over to them. In the one case the abasement

leads to gaining adherents, in the other case to procuring favour.

The
great state only wishes to unite men together and nourish them;

a small state only wishes to be received by, and to serve, the other.

Each gets what it desires, but the great state must learn to abase

itself.

A large state is like a great river valley;
the Mother of all under
heaven.
In the union of all under heaven
she conquers her ravisher by
stillness.
Because she is still,
it is fitting for her to lie low.

By
lying beneath a small state,
a large state can take over the smaller.

By lying beneath a large state,
a smaller one can take over the larger state.

Therefore,
one may either take over or be taken over, by lying low.
Thus,
a large state wishes only to annex and nurture others;
a small state wishes
only to join-with and serve others.
Now, since both get what they seek,

it is fitting for the larger state to lie low.

A
great domain is like the sea

Whose power comes from lying low

And due to this humility

Its greatness has to grow

A
small domain can lie low too

Acknowledging its low location

Surrender and humility

Give rise to exaltation

If
you lie low you too arise

To uppermost position

For everyone's attracted to

One who doesn't fear submission

A GREAT country is like the lowland toward which all

streams flow. It is the Reservoir of all under heaven,

the Feminine of the world. The Feminine always conquers the Masculine by her

quietness, by lowering herself through her quietness. Hence, if a great country can lower itself before a

small country, it will win over the small country; and if a

small country can lower itself before a great country, it

will win over the great country. The one wins by

stooping; the other, by remaining low. What a great country wants is simply to embrace

more people; and what a small country wants is simply

to come to serve its patron. Thus, each gets what it

wants. But it behooves a great country to lower itself.

The great country may be compared to a low-lying lake where many rivers converge;

it is the mixing place of the world, the reservoir of all under heaven... the Feminine of the world.

Femininity always overcomes Masculinity, by stillness,

her tranquility gives rise to her humility.

Thus it is that the great country can win over the small country by this practicing of stillness and humility.

And the small state by the practice of humility and deference to the large country can gain the large country and become one with it.

So it is said that by practice of quiescence and humility the great can absorb and conquer the small without effort,

and the small and insignificant can gain riches and treasure by submitting to the great.

The great state wishes to keep and nourish its people, and help others.

The small state wishes to help its people by joining with the peace and strength of the larger state.

Both states get what they wish by submitting.

Greatness lies in placing oneself below.

A large country should take the low place like a great watershed,

which from its low position assumes the female role.

The female overcomes the male by the power of her position.

Her tranquility gives rise to her humility.

If
a large country takes the low position,

it will be able to influence smaller countries.

If smaller countries take the lower position,

then they can allow themselves to be influenced.

So both seek to take the lower position

in order to influence the other, or be influenced.

Large
countries should desire to protect and help the people,

and small countries should desire to serve others.

Both large and small countries benefit greatly from humility.

It is a mistake to believe that a great leader is above others. Paradoxically, greatness comes from knowing how to be lowly and empty and receptive and of service.

Imagine that the life force is like water in the river and in the sea. The sea, greater than the river, lies below, open and receptive. The busy, rushing river enters the sea, is absorbed, and is transformed.

Or imagine that the leader is the feminine, lying below and open, empty, and receptive. The feminine receives the masculine and absorbs the masculine vibration. Soon the feminine has encompassed the masculine; the masculine has spent itself, become soft and resolved.

The wise leader is of service: receptive, yielding, following. The group member's vibrations dominates and leads, while the leader follows. But soon it is the member's consciousness which is transformed, the member's vibration which is resolved

The relationship is reciprocal. It is the job of the leader to be aware of the group member's process; it is the need of the group member to be received and paid attention to.

Both get what they need, if the leader has the wisdom to serve and follow, to be open and below.

A great country is like a low-lying lake where many rivers converge;

A foca point for the Earth, the feminine Spirit of the World.

The female always overcomes the male by stillness.

Stillness is the lowest position.

Therefore a big country, By placing itself below a smaller country

Wil win the smaller country.

And a smal country, By placing itself below a larger country

Wil gain the large country.

Therefore, by being humble, one gains

And the other, being humble already, also gains.

A great country needs to embrace the lowly.

The smal country needs to serve others.

Thus, both needs are satisfied

And each gets what it wants.

Remember, the great country should always humble itself.

The
great nation is like the ocean,

at one with Infinity,

it receives all waters in peace and harmony.

The
female integrates the male

by residing in peace and harmony.

Therefore,
if the great nation does not

distinguish

the small nation as separate from itself,

it will integrate the smaller nation

into its oneness.

If
a small nation does not distinguish itself as

different from

from the great nation,

it will incorporate the peace and

harmony

of the great nation.

A
great nation conquers by being a reservoir of

peace and harmony.

A small nation conquers by becoming one with the

great nation.

The
great state is a reservoir

of peace and harmony for smaller states.

Small states seek the peace and harmony

of the great state.

Both get what they want; oneness.

It
is natural for the great nation to

be receptive to the smaller nation.

A large country is a floodplain,

the confluence of the world,

the female of the world.

The female passively overcomes the male,

passively keeps low.

The large country that keeps below the small country, acquires the small

country.

The small country that keeps below the large country, acquires the large

country.

Therefore, either keep low to acquire, or keep low to be acquired.

The large country, not mistakenly, wants to expand its settlements.

The small country, not mistakenly, wants to join the affairs of men.

So together each gets what it wants.

The larger one quite properly keeps low.

A large state is like low-lying land where the flowing waters meet:1

The female of the world.

It is the stillness of the feminine which overcomes the masculine.

Keeping still is to keep to the lower position.

Therefore the large state can conquer the small state by giving way to the small state.

And the small state can conquer the large state by submitting to the large state.

Thus, in order to conquer one must yield,

And those who conquer do so by yielding.

Since the large state wishes to take in more people,

And the small state wishes to serve the people,

Both have their wishes met.

It is right for a large state to yield.

1. i.e. the centre to which all things tend to gravitate.

A big country should position itself low

So as to be the world's mother ocean.

The biggest producer is for ever still and peaceful,

Dissolves all the commotions with her stillness,

And keeps her lowness with her stillness, too.

Therefore, if a big country can be humble toward a small one,

It will win over the small country.

If a small country can be humble toward a big one,

It will win over the big country.

Thus, countries either lower themselves to win over others

Or lower themselves to be tolerated by others.

A big country's purpose is to support all kinds of people.

A small country's purpose is to gain support to serve people.

To satisfy the two purposes,

The big country should be more yielding in attitude.

The great state is a low and easy woman for the world the one the Whole world unites with. Femininity always overcomes Masculinity, by Stillness, in Stillness it takes the low place.

Yes: A great state, by putting itself lower than the smaller state, will win out over the smaller state. A small state, by putting itself lower than the great state, will win out over the great state.

Yes: One puts itself lower so it will win out, if the other gets lower, then it will win.

(A great state has no further desire than to embrace and protect other states. A small state has no further desire than to enter and serve other states.

So both get what they want) The greatest should be the lowest.

The Great Kingdom of Tao* is located as if behind the mouth of a river.

The Ocean is below all rivers, and all rivers flow into It.

The Ocean is calm and patient. It waits those who approach It and enter It.

The Ocean is a Great Kingdom, but on the Earth there are only small kingdoms composed of people.

The Great Kingdom takes care of satisfying with Itself all who enter It.

So, let the rulers of small kingdoms take care that all people be satisfied.

Then all will receive everything what they want — both in the Great Kingdom and in small kingdoms.

And let us remember that the Great always has to be below all.

* In other terms — the Abode of the Creator.

A big country attracts everybody.

There many people will meet.

It is like the feminine spirit that attracts by submission.

One who submits leads in a subtle way.

In
a similar way, a big country which

Does not show its pride and power

Will conquer the small countries without struggle.

If a small country submits becomes bigger

Thus the big country acquires more people

And the small country more space.

The gain is therefore mutual.

A
large country is at the low end of the watershed. It takes the role of the female
in the world. In the interactions that take place in the world, the female always
overcomes the male by means of her tranquility. Because of her tranquility the
female is the lower one. {Therefore it is appropriate that she be lower.} So
if the large country takes the lower position with regard to the smaller countries,
it can then take the smaller countries. If the smaller countries take the lower
position with regard to the larger country, then they can {be} take{n by} the
larger country. So either one is lower in order to take, or lower in order to
be taken. The larger country only desire to foster all of the people. The smaller
countries only desire to enter into the service of others. Now when the two
sides each have gotten what they desire, it is appropriate that the larger country
still take the lower role.

A large state is like the low land;

It is the focus point of the world

And the female of the world.

The female always conquers the male by serenity.

In serenity, she puts herself low.

Therefore, the large state puts itself beneath the small state,

And thereby absorbs the small state.

The small state puts itself under the large state,

And thereby joins with the large state.

Therefore, one either puts himself beneath to absorb others,

Or puts himself under to join with others.

What the large state wants is no more than to feed the people.

What the small state wants is no more than to join and serve the people.

Both have their needs satisfied.

Thus the large ought to stay low.

The Power in Modesty

A large organization should flow downward

To intersect with the world.

It is the female of the world.

The female always overcomes the male by stillness;

Through stillness, she makes herself low.

Thus if a large organization

Is lower than a small organization,

It can receive the small organization.

And if the small organization

Stays lower than a large organization,

It can receive the large organization.

Therefore one receives by becoming low;

Another receives by being low.

Yet what a large organization desires

Is to unite and support others.

And what a small organization desires

Is to join and serve others.

So for both to gain the position they desire,

The larger should place itself low.

When you err, admit it, and then correct it. Hide in your error and you have created the ultimate enemy. Everything you need is within your bounds.

The great land is a place

To which the streams descend;

It is the concourse and

The female of the world:

Quiescent, underneath,

It overcomes the male.

By
quietness and by humility

The great land then puts down the small

And gets it for its own;

But small lands too absorb the great

By their subservience.

Thus some lie low, designing conquest's ends;

While others lowly are, by nature bent

To conquer all the rest.

The
great land's foremost need is to increase

The number of its folk;

The small land needs above all else to find

Its folk more room to work.

That both be served and each attain its goal

The great land should attempt humility.

A great state lies lower (like rivers and seas into which all streams run),

To it all things under Heaven tend,

It considers itself as the female under Heaven.

The female always overcomes the male by stillness, because it is still and lies lower.

Therefore, a great state can, by lowering itself to small states, make the small states rely upon the big states.

Small states can, by lowering themselves to a great state, win trust from it.

Thus a great state sometimes makes small states rely upon it by lowering itself.

And sometimes, small states win the trust from a great state only by lowering themselves.

What the great state desires is to lead the small states,

And what the small states desire is to serve the great state.

Then each side gets what it desires,

But the great state should especially learn to lower itself.

A large state is a catchment into which flow occurs.

It is where all under Heaven unite.

It is the female for all under Heaven.

The female always conquers the male because of quietude.

She is able to take the low position because of quietude.

Thus the large state, by placing itself beneath the small state,

Consequently takes over the small state.

The small state, by placing itself beneath the large state, subsequently is taken over by the large state.

Thus some, by taking a place beneath, take over, and some, by taking a place beneath, are taken over.

The large state should desire nothing more than to bring people together and nurture them, and the small state should desire nothing more than to join in and serve people.

In order that both obtain what they desire, it is fitting that the large one place itself beneath.

1. The large state is like the lower part of a river;

2. It is the female of the world;

3. It is the meeting point of the world.

4. The female constantly overcomes the male with tranquility.

5. Because she is tranquil, therefore she is fittingly underneath.

6.
The large state—if it is below the small state, then it takes over the small
state;

7. The small state—if it is below the large state, then it is taken over by
the large state.

8. Therefore some by being low take over,

9. And some by being low are taken over.

10.
Therefore the large state merely desires to unite and rear others;

11. While the small state merely desires to enter and serve others.

12. If both get what they want,

13. Then the large state should fittingly be underneath.

Power flows
down

to every level of existence

like a river to the ocean.

Victory comes

from lying perfectly still

and waiting for power

to come your way.

If you yield
to someone

less powerful than yourself,

you will be in a position

to influence them.

If you submit
to someone

more powerful than yourself,

you create an opportunity

to get your own way.

So if you want
to get ahead,

lay low and bide your time.

That way, everybody's happy.

.

Large and Small Countries

A large country is like low land where rivers flow,

a place where everything comes together, the female of all.

The female overcomes the male with tranquillity.

Tranquillity is underneath.

A large country wins over a small country

by placing itself below the small country.

A small country wins over a large country

by placing itself below the large country.

Thus some win by placing themselves below,

and others win by being below.

A large country wants to protect people,

and a small country wants to join and serve.

Thus both get what they want.

It is best for the large country to place itself below.

The great place themselves low like streams rushing toward the sea which unites in itself rivers and brooks.

As woman conquers man through gentleness winning through surrender the great win the small through service and the small the great.

Service ensures conquest service makes superior.

When the great thus protect the small and advance them and the small willingly serve the whole all are served.

Greatness and oneness both thrive on surrender and are maintained through service.

The Large And Small States

Lao Tze says,

Like water, a large state should keep a low profile as it goes down stream, in order that it becomes the pivot of the world.

The female is the master of the world.

The female always overcomes the male by being still.

Stillness may be considered as a sort of abasement.

Thus a large state, by abasing itself to smaller states, annexes the small states;

while small states, by abasing themselves, affiliate themselves with larger states.

In one case the abasement leads to gaining allies, in the other case it procures favors.

The large state wishes only to increase population;

small states wish only to be guarded.

Each gets what it desires, but the large state must learn to abase itself first.

HUMILITY

A
great country remains receptive and still,

as does a rich and fertile land.

The gentle overcomes the strong

with stillness and receptivity.

By
giving way to the other,

one country may conquer another;

a small country may submit to a large,

and conquer it, though having no arms.

Those
who conquer must be willing to yield;

to yield may be to overcome.

A
fertile nation may require a greater population,

to use its resources to the full,

whilst the country without such natural wealth

may require them to meet its people's needs.

By acting in unity, each may achieve

that which it requires.

When a country obtains great power,

it becomes like the sea:

all streams run downward into it.

The more powerful it grows,

the greater the need for humility.

Humility means trusting the Tao,

thus never needing to be defensive.

A great nation is like a great man:

When he makes a mistake, he realizes it.

Having realized it, he admits it.

Having admitted it, he corrects it.

He considers those who point out his faults

as his most benevolent teachers.

He thinks of his enemy

as the shadow that he himself casts.

If a nation is centered in the Tao,

if it nourishes its own people

and doesn't meddle in the affairs of others,

it will be a light to all nations in the world.

To conduct a policy of a large country should be like a valley staying in the lower ground.

To conduct international affairs the best policy, is to be humble and non-aggressive (inactive).

Everyplace under the sun, all females outsmart the males by inaction.

Be inactive and be humble.

Therefore, the large country which is humble before the small country will lead the small country.

The small country which is humble before the large country will please the large country.

Thus sometimes a country unites the world by being humble and sometimes a country becomes humble in order to unite the world.

What a great country wants is no more than to lead more people.

What the small country wants is no more than to serve others.

To let both of them get what they want is simply to insure that the large country be humble.

A great nation flows downwardly, it is the mother of the world and the integration of the world.

The mother is always tranquil and overcomes the male by her tranquility, so she benefits the world.

A great nation relies on a low position to take over a small nation.

A small nation, being in a low position, is taken over by a great nation.

So being lower allows taking over or being taken over.

Being a great nation only desires to unify the people.

Being a small nation only seeks people's business.

They both get what they want, but the greater is being lower.

LXI

A
great state is like the lowest part of a river

All things flow down to it, given time

It has the resources to let myriad things grow in its borders

And so it is better cast in the feminine principle

If
it rests quietly, then weaker states will come to it

And both will be enriched

If it reaches out to conquer, then weaker states will resist

And both will be impoverished

The
great state desires diversity and prosperity

The weak state desires to be great

If both would get what they want

The great state must let itself be lower

A Great Nation Flows Downward

A great nation flows downward

into intercourse with the world.

The female of the world

always prevails over the male by stillness.

Because stillness is considered lower,

by lowering itself to a small nation

a great nation takes a small nation;

by being lower than a great nation

a small nation takes a great nation.

So one takes by lowering itself,

another takes by being lower.

A great nation wants no more

than to include and nurture people;

a small nation wants no more

than to admit and serve people.

Both get what they want,

so the great should be below.

A great kingdom is like the mouth of rivers; it is like the female, or the hub of the world.

Females frequently win males with their serenity.

Serenity means humbleness.

Therefore when a great kingdom is humble, it wins small kingdoms.

When a small kingdom is humble, it wins great kingdoms.

This is why with humbleness one can win and will win.

A great kingdom should not excessively conquer.

A small kingdom should avoid undue vassalage.

In order for both great and small kingdoms to have their wishes, it is better for great kingdoms to be humble.

A great country is like the low stream.

It is where the world flows together.

It is the feminine of the world.

The feminine always conquers the masculine by her quietness; she is in a lower place by her quietness.

Hence, if a big state is below a small state, it will win over the small state.

If a small is below a big state, it will win over the big state.

The one wins by lowering itself; the other, by remaining low.

What a great state wants is simply to embrace and protect more people.

What a small country wants is simply to participate and to submit its patron.

Thus, each gets what it wants.

But it behooves a big state to lower itself.

A great country is like low land,

the converging place of the world.

Every female, overcomes the male with peacefulness (not fighting),

lying underneath.

Therefore, a great country lay low to serve a smaller country,

conquers the smaller country.

A small country submits to a big country,

gets help from the big country.

Therefore, those who conquer must yield,

those who don't want to be conquered, must yield.

A great nation needs more people,

a small country must serve (exchange for help),

each gets what it wants.

Want to be great, better yield.

A great country is like the low lands

where all the streams unite.

In
all things under heaven

the female overcomes the male by her stillness,

and because she is still she lies below.

Hence,
if the great country will take the low place

it will win over the little country.

If the little country will take the low place

it will win over the great country.

Thus,
the one gets below and prospers

and the other remains below and prospers.

All that the great country wants is more people.

All that the little country wants is a place

for its people to go and to be employed.

If each is to get what it wants

it is necessary for the great country

to take the low place.

Religion
should be like low land

everything flowing towards it

all ideas converging on it.

By receiving it absorbs

by absorbing it becomes more basic.

When religion becomes more basic

it will be followed by others.

Large religions absorb small ones

by conquering and converting with force and argument

small ones absorb large ones

by being underneath.

Large
ideas, small followings;

small ideas, large followings

one serves the other.

A big kingdom can be compared to the lower part of a river, like the low ground
which all streams flow down towards.

Here is a point towards which all things under heaven converge. Its part must
be that of the woman

who overcomes man by simple quietude. By [such as] quiescence she gets underneath,
and by tranquillity she is down under.

A
big kingdom can take over [a soul of] a small one if it succeeds in getting
itself below the small kingdom; If so it absorbs some from the small country,
or wins some adherence of the small kingdom in the open.

If
a small country on the other hand places itself below a big country, it can
absorbs or take over some of the big country [assets]. Therefore some place
themselves low so as to take over or absorb (others). Some are (naturally) low
and absorb (others). Because small kingdoms are by nature in this way underneath
large kingdoms, they [sometimes] win the adherence of large kingdoms [or end].

What
a big kingdom is after is but to annex and herd others. So what large countries
really need is a lot of inhabitants. What small countries need is some place
where their surplus inhabitants can go and get employment. What they want can
be little more that to join, be somewhat sheltered and perhaps serve for it
all.

Both
can have what they want; I say the large kingdom must "get underneath".

A large state is like a low-lying estuary,

the female of all under heaven.

In the congress of all under heaven,

the female always conquers the male through her stillness.

Because she is still, it is fitting for her to lie low.

By lying beneath a small state,

a large state can take over a small state.

By lying beneath a large state,

a small state can be taken over by a large state.

Therefore,

One may either take over or be taken over by lying low.

Therefore,

The large state wishes only to annex and nurture others;

The small state wants only to join with and serve others.

Now,

Since both get what they want,

It is fitting for the large state to lie low.

The kingdom, like a river, becomes great by being lowly; it is thereby the centre to which all the world tends.

It is similar in the case of woman:

She conquers man by continual quietness.

And quietness is the same as submission.

Therefore a great state, by condescension to those beneath it, may gain the government of them.

Likewise a small state, by submission to one that is greater, may secure its alliance.

Thus the one gains adherence, and the other obtains favours.

Although the great state desires to annex and to nourish others, yet the small state desires to be allied to and serve the greater.

Thus both will be satisfied, if only the greater will condescend.

Your Life Together Is Unlike All Others

Comparing your relationship

to other relationships

will lead you far afield.

You will either inflate yourselves,

"Thank goodness we don't behave like the Taylors!"

Or you will diminish yourselves,

"If only we were as romantic as the Wilsons."

Instead of looking at others,

look honestly at yourselves.

You life together is unlike all others.

It must become uniquely itself.

Your relationship becomes itself

by considering the questions,

"What do we truly like to do?

How do we really feel about that?

What actually brings us peace and joy?"

Forget for a moment what others say.

Forget what couples are supposed to do.

If there were no "supposed to's"

what would you do?

A big country may be compared to the lower part of a river. It is the
converging point of the world; It is the female of the world. The female
always overcomes the male by tranquillity, And by tranquillity she is
underneath.

A big state can take over a small state if it places itself below the
small state; And the small state can take over a big state if it places
itself below the big state.

Thus some, by placing themselves below, take over (others), And some, by being (naturally) low, take over (other states).

After all, what a big state wants is but to annex and herd others, And
what a small state wants is merely to join and serve others.

Since both big and small states get what they want, The big state should place itself low.

A large country
is the low level of interflowing rivers.

It draws people to the sea-end of a valley

As the female draws the male,

Receives it into absorbing depth

Because depth always absorbs.

And so a large country, inasfar as it is deeper than a small country,

Absorbs the small-

Or a small country, inasfar as it is deeper than a large country,

Absorbs the large.

Some countnes consciously seek depth into which to draw others.

Some countries naturally have depth into which to draw others:

A large country needs to admit,

A small country needs to emit,

And so each country can naturally have what it needs

If the large country submit.

When governing a big country, you should be humble,

Like the lowest point where water meets, or like the females of the world.

Females always overcome males by being peaceful; being peaceful is humble.

Therefore, if a big country humbles itself to a small country, it can lead the small country;

If a small country humbles itself to a big country, it can get help from the big country.

So, humbleness leads either to leading a small country or to getting help from a big country.

A big country always wants to lead a small country,

A small country always wants to get help from a big country;

They can achieve their goals by being humble.

So the big should be humble.

A great country is like a low-lying estuary,

A place where the myriad streams of the world come together.

She is also like a receptive female drawing in an eager male.

The female always conquers the male through her stillness,

Because she knows how to lie low through her stillness.

Thus,

a great country can win over a small country by lying low.

A small country can also win over a great country by lying low.

Therefore, one may either win over or be won over by taking the lower position.

A great country only wants to embrace and nourish more people.

A small country only wants to be embraced and serve her benefactor.

Thus, both can achieve their ends by practicing humility.

Therefore, especially a great country must practice humility.

A big country should position itself low

So as to be the world's mother ocean.

The biggest producer is for ever still and peaceful,

Dissolves all the commotions with her stillness,

And keeps her lowness with her stillness, too.

Therefore, if a big country can be humble toward a small one,

It will win over the small country.

If a small country can be humble toward a big one,

It will win over the big country.

Thus, countries either lower themselves to win over others

Or lower themselves to be tolerated by others.

A big country's purpose is to support all kinds of people.

A small country's purpose is to gain support to serve people.

To satisfy the two purposes,

The big country should be more yielding in attitude.

The great country may be compared to a low-lying lake where many rivers converge;

it is the mixing place of the world, the reservoir of all under heaven... the Feminine of the world.

Femininity always overcomes Masculinity, by stillness,

her tranquility gives rise to her humility.

Thus it is that the great country can win over the small country by this practicing of stillness and humility.

And the small state by the practice of humility and deference to the large country can gain the large country and become one with it.

So it is said that by practice of quiescence and humility the great can absorb and conquer the small without effort,

and the small and insignificant can gain riches and treasure by submitting to the great.

The great state wishes to keep and nourish its people, and help others.

The small state wishes to help its people by joining with the peace and strength of the larger state.

Both states get what they wish by submitting.

Greatness lies in placing oneself below.

