===== Chapter 67 =====

Everyone in the world calls my Tao "great"

As if nothing resembled it.

Precisely because it is great

Is the reason it seems that nothing resembles it.

Supposing it resembled [something]—

Long-standing indeed its pettiness would be [for] man!

I have three treasures.

Keep and protect them.

The first is called "motherly love"

The second is called "meagerness"

The third is called "not daring to be foremost in the world."

Motherly love is the reason I can be brave.

Meagerness is the reason I can be expansive.

Not daring to be foremost in the world

Is the reason I can achieve magnanimous leadership.

To desist today from motherly love and so also bravery

From meagerness and so also expansiveness

From being behind and so also being in front—

Is Death indeed.

Those fighting by means of motherly love

Are necessarily victorious

Because [their] defense is completely solid.

Heaven will help them

And

With motherly love

Protect them.

Everyone under heaven calls my Tao great, and unlike anything else. It
is great only because It is unlike anything else. If it were like
anything else It would stretch and become thin.

I have three treasures to maintain and conserve: the first is
compassion. The second is frugality. The third is not presuming To be
first under heaven.

Compassion leads to courage. Frugality allows generosity. Not presuming to be first Creates a lasting instrument.

Nowadays, People reject compassion But want to be brave, Reject
frugality But want to be generous, Reject humility And want to come
first. This is death.

Compassion: Attack with it and win. Defend with it and stand firm. Heaven aids and protects Through compassion.

The whole world says:

"What you teach is great yet unlike anything else."

It is its greatness that makes it unlike anything else.

Were it like everything else

It would have become trivial a long time ago.

I have three treasures which I hold and keep safe.

The first is compassion.

The second economy.

The third not daring to take the lead.

If you're compassionate you can be fearless.

If you're not wasteful you can be giving.

If you're afraid to lead you can attain the highest honors.

Today people renounce compassion and try to be brave.

They are wasteful in extreme and try to be giving.

They refuse to be follow and they try to take the lead.

They are certainly doomed.

Compassion gives you victory in battle

And strength in defense.

When heaven comes to your rescue

With its compassion it keeps you safe.

THE THREE TREASURES

While being recognized and proclaimed as great by consensus of all people,

Yet the Tao is indescribable.

Being indescribable by common standards,

It is great.

Were it so describable,

Its greatness would have long ago vanished.

From it, three great treasures are possessed,

To be embraced, guarded and kept secure.

The first is Tzu,

Characterized by gentleness, compassion, mercy and nurturing love.

The second, Chien,

By renunciation, frugality and economy which limits possession to no more than that which is truly needed.

When encompassing the third,

One rejects the need for worldly preeminence.

Possessing the first,

Is to possess courage.

Being frugal,

It is possible to be generous.

No longer needing preeminence,

One becomes a leader.

Forsaking these,

Endeavoring to be courageous without compassion,

Endeavoring to possess without renunciation,

Endeavoring to lead all without following behind,

Is to surely court destruction.

Through gentleness, compassion, mercy and nurturing love,

The Sage wins in attack,

Is impregnable in defense.

Truly, heaven arms with love those whom it would not see destroyed.

All people of Heaven below (the sacred body) call the Tao great because it does not resemble anything.

The masters are great because they do not resemble anything.

The Tao is barely visible.

It endures!

It is exquisite!

The master says, "I have three treasures. I hold and protect them."

One is called compassion.

Two is called moderation.

Three is known as not presuming to venture ahead of Heaven below.

Compassion gives you the power to be courageous.

Moderation gives you the power to be generous.

Not presuming to venture ahead of Heaven below gives you the power to succeed in expanding your vessel (body).

Nowadays people:

- forsake compassion to be daring.

- forsake moderation to be abundant.

- forsake, postpone, and soon die!

Through compassion the master can fight to overcome.

By holding firm to this, heaven takes them in hand and takes care of them.

Compassion protects them.

THE THREE JEWELS

They say that while this Tao of mine is great, yet it is inferior. This

is the proof of its greatness. If it were like anything else, its

smallness would have long been known.

I
have three jewels of price whereto I cleave; gentleness, economy, and

humility.

That
gentleness maketh me courageous, that economy generous, that

humility honoured. Men of today abandon gentleness for violence, economy

for extravagance, humility for pride: this is death.

Gentleness
bringeth victory in fight; and holdeth its ground with

assurance. Heaven wardeth the gentle man by that same virtue.

All the world says that, while my Tao is great, it yet appears to beinferior (to other systems of teaching). Now it is just its greatness thatmakes it seem to be inferior. If it were like any other (system), for longwould its smallness have been known! But I have three precious things whichI prize and hold fast. The first is gentleness; the second is economy;and the third is shrinking from taking precedence of others. With thatgentleness I can be bold; with that economy I can be liberal; shrinkingfrom taking precedence of others, I can become a vessel of the highesthonour. Now-a-days they give up gentleness and are all for being bold;economy, and are all for being liberal; the hindmost place, and seek onlyto be foremost;-(of all which the end is) death. Gentleness is sure tobe victorious even in battle, and firmly to maintain its ground. Heavenwill save its possessor, by his (very) gentleness protecting him.

In life I am great, but to the world I am a failure

In my grandeur, I am different from all the rest

And that is exactly therefore the reason I am great

If I would be like the rest, I would be just as unimportant and insignificant

I have three treasures I cherish:

The first is compassion

The second is austerity

The third is modesty

Thanks to my compassion I can be brave

Because I am austere I can be unselfish

Because I am modest I can lead the way

But one who abandons his compassion and yet wants to be brave

One who renounces austerity and yet wants to be unselfish

One who stops being modest and still wants to be important

Won't make it far

One who fights with compassion, will conquer

Because he doesn't need to defend himself, he's invulnerable

The Unspeakable will protect him with its compassion

Everyone says: "Nature is great, yet Nature is simple." It is great because it is simple. If it were not simple, long ago it would have come to little.

Nature sustains itself through three precious principles, which one does well to embrace and follow. These are gentleness, frugality and humility.

When one is gentle, he has no fear of retaliation. When one is frugal, he has no fear of retaliation. When one is humble, no one challenges his leadership.

When rudeness replaces gentleness, And extravagance replaces frugality, and pride replaces humility, The one is doomed.

Since a gentle attack arouses little antagonism, And a gentle defense provokes little anger, Nature predisposes to gentleness those most suited for survival.

Every one under heaven says that our Way is greatly like folly.

But it is just because it is great, that it seems like folly.

As for things that do not seem like folly — well,

There can be no question about their smallness!

Here are my three treasures.

Guard and keep them!

The first is pity;

The second, frugality;

The third, refusal to be "foremost of all things under heaven."

For only he that pities is truly able to be brave;

Only he that is frugal is able to be profuse.

Only he that refuse to be foremost of all things

Is truly able to become chief of all Ministers.

At present your bravery is not based on pity,

Nor your profusion on frugality,

Nor your vanguard on your rear; and this is death.

But pity cannot fight without conquering or guard without.

But pity cannot fight without conquering or guard without saving.

Heaven arms with pity those whom it would not see destroyed.

Everyone agrees the Tao I teach is great, yet unlike anything else.

Indeed, if it were not singular it would not endure.

I hold three treasures close:

The first is unconditional regard for all.

The second is being content with little.

The third is not placing myself before others.

From compassion comes courage.

From contentment comes an open heart.

From humility comes the capacity to lead.

Daring without mercy,

giving without generosity,

ruling without modesty,

this is the way of death.

Attacking with compassion, you are victorious.

Defending with compassion, you are impregnable.

What heaven favors it infuses with compassion.

Everyone in the world admits our way is great

(And) resembles no likeness

It is insofar as it is great

That it resembles no likeness

Had it a likeness

Surely after so long

It might have diminished a little

Here I have three treasures

Take and keep them safe:

The first, call compassion

The second, call economy

The third, call never presuming to act as the world's leader

Compassion confers a capacity for courage

Economy confers a capacity for breadth

Never presuming to act as the world's leader

confers a capacity to develop enduring talents

To right away set aside compassion

in order to be more courageous

To set aside economy in order to be more expansive

To set aside following in order to be more advanced

Is truly deadly

Now compassion used in combat means triumph

Used in defense means security

Those whom heaven would redeem

With compassion it protects them

Three treasures

The whole world says, I am the Great;

Great and unlike everyone else.

But it is precisely because I am unlike everyone else,

That I am therefore able to be the Great.

Were I like everyone else,

For a long time now I would have seemed

insignificant and small.

I hold and keep three treasures;

Hold on to them and treasure them.

The first is compassion;

the second is frugality;

The third is not presuming to be

At the forefront of the world.

Now. it is because I am compassionate

that I therefore can be courageous;

And, it is because I am frugal

that I therefore can be generous;

And it is because I do not presume

To be at the forefront of the world,

That I therefore can be the head

of those with complete talent.

Now, if you abandon this compassion,

and yet try to be courageous,

And if you abandon this frugality,

And yet try to be generous;

And if you abandon this staying behind

And yet try to be first.

Then you will die

If with compasssion you attack, you will win;

If you defend, then you will stand firm.

When Heaven is about to establish him,

It is as though he surrounds him

with the protective wall of compassion.

Everyone under heaven says that my Tao is great, but inconceivable. It is its very greatness that makes it inconceivable! If it could be conceived of, how small it would be!

I have three treasures to hold and protect: The first is motherly love. The second is economy. The third is daring not to be first in the world.

With motherly love one can be courageous. With economy one can be expansive. With humility one can lead.

To be courageous without motherly love, To be expansive without practicing economy, To go to the front without humility - this is courting death.

Venture with love and you win the battle. Defend with love and you are invulnerable. Heaven's secret is motherly love.

People think the Tao extraordinary,

And tell me, "what a wonder you have made!"

Perhaps the only wonder is

That we should think it extraordinary at all.

For if it were truly a mere

Treasure of the imagination,

Then it would be as good as worthless.

I have but three pearls

That I keep and cherish:

The first is love,

The second is avoiding excess,

The third is modesty.

When these three lead, the true self follows.

Love can thereby be fearless,

Excess negated can thus be generous,

Modesty can therefore lead the world,

And help its life force to endure.

But today the ego has renounced pure love,

And elevated empty chivalry;

It has wasted moderation

By exalting lavishness;

It has abandoned modesty

For the sake of renown.

This is to walk the path of death.

Enter a conflict with love still alive,

For its defense is stronger

Than the highest wall can ever provide.

The Tao, of course, is not at all extraordinary—only ego makes it so. Tao is the ordinary, normal way of life and being within the cosmos. Lao Tzu didn't create the Tao—it is not a figment of his imagination, nor some cosmological theory he invented, nor a pleasant but idle puddle of poetic fancy. Tao is Lao Tzu's name for the living Consciousness that we can experience through our inner life, and Te (Modesty) is a word for how that experience can transform both the outer and inner aspects of our lives. Lao Tzu is again encouraging us to "negate the excess" of fixed beliefs and attitudes toward life and the cosmos, and experience Tao for ourselves, within ourselves—to see how this living but impersonal Presence finds voice and substance within the unique vessel of each true self—for where it leads, the true self follows.

The world says:

"Tao is great but seems so foolish!"

It seems foolish because it is great.

If it did not seem so foolish

it would long since have lost its value.

I
have three treasures.

Guard them and keep them safe!

The first is love,

the second is moderation,

the third is humility.

From
love one gains courage,

from moderation one gains ability,

from humility one achieves greatness.

To
forsake love and courage,

to forsake moderation and ability,

to forsake humility and rush to the forefront,

is death to all hope.

With
love battles can be won,

with love defense proves invulnerable,

with love heaven arms those it would protect.

It was once generally affirmed that the greater the Self the more impossible it was to compare it with anything else. Now it is just this greatness which makes it incomparable; should, however, a comparison be demanded, it would have to be described as the eternal, which is imperceptible. Now the Self has three

treasures, to which it clings as to inseparables: the first is compassion, the second, self-restraint, the third, nowhere venturing to claim precedence.

Compassionate – therefore irresistible!

Self-restrained – therefore enlarged!

Nowhere venturing to claim precedence – therefore efficient!

Nowadays men cast compassion on one side, yet expect to be irresistible! They discard self-restraint, yet look for enlargement; they forget to retire, yet demand precedence! – this is death.

As regards compassion, rely on it when you would contend, and you will overcome; rely on it when you would protect, and you will succeed. Heaven is ever ready to deliver because of the protection compassion brings.

All the world says to me: 'Great as Tao is, it resembles no description (form).' Because it is great, therefore it resembles no description. If it resembled any description it would have long since become small.

I have three treasures, which I hold and keep safe:

The first is called love;

The second is called moderation;

The third is called not venturing to go ahead of the world.

Being loving, one can be brave;

Being moderate, one can be ample;

Not venturing to go ahead of the world, one can become the chief of all officials.

Instead of love, one has only bravery;

Instead of moderation, one has only amplitude;

Instead of keeping behind, one goes ahead:

These lead to nothing but death.

For he who fights with love will win the battle;

He who defends with love will be secure.

Heaven will save him, and protect him with love.

Three Treasures

Everyone in the social world calls my guide 'great'

It's like not resembling.

In general only being great hence like not resembling.

If it resembled, it would long since have been small!

I have three treasures. I grasp and preserve them.

The first is called 'charity' the second 'frugality' and the third not presuming
to deem-act coming before the social world.

Charity, hence one can be brave.

Frugal, hence one can be magnanimous.

Not presuming to deem-act coming before the social world, hence one can to fulfill
the artifactual role of an elder.

Moderns abandon charity and are still brave.

Abandon frugality and are still liberal.

Abandon following and still put themselves in front.

Dead already!

Using charity in battle, one is victorious.

If involved in preserving then inherent nature will save it. Use charity to
defend it.

The world says that I am beyond determination

And cannot be identified with anything.

It is because I am beyond determination that I cannot be identified with anything.

If I could be identified with anything,

I would no longer be beyond determination.

There are three essentials that I value and maintain:

One is compassion (tz'u),

Another is renunciation (ch'ien),

The third is never longing to be first in the world.

One who is compassionate is able to be valiant.

One who renounces is able to broaden one's self.

One who never longs to be first in the world

Is able to achieve the full growth of his capacity.

In the present day, people wish to be valiant,

But they are not compassionate.

They wish to broaden their selves,

But they do not renounce.

They wish to achieve the full growth of their capacities,

But they long to be first in the world.

This indeed leads to death.

Through compassion, engaging in war, one wins.

In self-defense, one is very well protected.

This type of person is saved by heaven.

Because he is compassionate, he is taken care of well.

The whole world says that the Tao is great, and that it seems without form.

It is great - that is why it has no form.

It has existed for a long time, and can also seem small.

I have three treasures that I keep and protect:

the first is goodheartedness,

the second is frugality,

the third is not daring to take the lead.

Only goodheartedness can bring courage.

Only frugality can bring generosity.

Not daring to take the lead can bring leadership.

Now to give up goodheartedness for courage, frugality for generosity, the rear for the lead,

will surely lead to the end.

Goodheartedness in battle will lead to victory,

and defence will strengthen the territory.

Heaven will save the one who follows this and guard him with goodheartedness.

All under heaven say I am vast;

Vast, but resemble nothing.

It is precisely because I resemble nothing

That I can be vast.

If I had resembled anything,

Long ago I would have become tiny indeed.

I constantly have three treasures

Which I uphold and value:

First, compassion;

Second, frugality;

Third, not daring to precede all under heaven.

Being compassionate,

I can be courageous;

Being frugal,

I can be all-embracing;

Not daring to precede all under heaven,

I can serve as

Head of the great vessels.

Now, if I had abandoned compassion and chosen courage,

Abandoned frugality and chosen all-embracingness;

Abandoned the back and chosen the front,

It would have been the death of me.

For compassion, used in battle,

Will bring you victory;

Used in defence,

Will make you impregnable.

When heaven is about to establish someone,

It seems to wall him up with compassion.

What the Tao is to the world,

So the streams and valleys are to the rivers and seas.

Rivers and seas can be like kings to all the streams and valleys

Since the former can lower themselves before the latter.

Thus they are the kings of all the streams and valleys.

Therefore the sage, in order to be above the people,

Must lower himself before them in words,

And in order to head the people,

He must place himself behind them in body.

Thus, when he is above the people, the people do not suffer at his hand,

When he is at the head of the people, the people are not held back by him.

Therefore the whole world wants to carry him on its shoulders

And never tires of him.

He competes with nobody,

And therefore nobody competes with him.

The whole world says that my way is vast and resembles nothing.

It is because it is vast that it resembles nothing.

If it resembled anything, it would, long before now, have become small.

I
have three treasures

Which I hold and cherish.

The first is known as compassion,

The second is known as frugality,

The third is known as not daring to take the lead in the empire;

Being compassionate one could afford to be courageous,

Being frugal one could afford to extend one's territory,

Not daring to take the lead in the empire one could afford to be lord over the
vessels.

Now,
to forsake compassion for courage, to forsake frugality for expansion, to forsake
the rear for the lead, is sure to end in death.

Through
compassion, one will triumph in attack and be impregnable in defence.

What heaven succours it protects with the gift of compassion.

The Three Treasures

All in the world call me great; but I resemble the unlikely. Now a man is great only because he resembles the unlikely. Did he resemble the likely, how lasting, indeed, would his mediocrity be!

1 have three treasures which I cherish and prize. The first is called compassion. The second is called economy. The third is called not daring to come to the front in the world.

The compassionate can be brave; the economical can be generous; those who dare not come to the front in the world can become perfect as chief vessels.

Now, if people discard compassion and are brave; if they discard economy and are generous; if they discard modesty and are ambitious, they will surely die.

Now, the compassionate will in attack be victorious, and in defence firm. Heaven when about to save one will with compassion protect him.

The Tao may appear to be idealistic, but if you can put it into practice, you realise its greatness. There are three traits which are required. 1. Compassion. 2. Patience. 3. Humility Compassionate and you can face things the way they are. Thus you can forgive yourself of any mistake. Patient and you remain unmoved until the right opportunity arises. Humble and you overcome self-importance, thus the ego. In following the Tao, these are your three most valuable treasures.

People in the world say that my Direction is grand as if without a referent.

It is because it is grand that Direction is without a referent.

Were it capable of being referenced, it would not be grand.

I have three treasures - embrace and safeguard them.

One, affection.

Two, restraint.

Three, daring not to be at the front of [the people] of the world.

With affection, one becomes courageous;

With restraint, one becomes tolerant;

Daring not to be at the front of the world, one is at the head.

One courts death if one

forsakes affection for courage,

forsakes restraint for tolerance,

forsakes humility for prominence.

With affection,

in war, one wins;

in defense, strengthens.

When cosmos comes to the rescue, it shields with affection.

People throughout all beneath heaven say

my Tao is so vast it's like nothing at all.

But it's only vast because it's like nothing at all:

if it were like anything else

it would have long since become trifling.

There are three treasures

I hold and nurture:

The first is called compassion,

the second economy,

and the third never daring to lead all beneath heaven.

Courage comes of compassion, generosity comes of economy,

and commanding leadership comes of never daring to lead all beneath heaven.

But these days it's all courage without compassion, generosity without economy, and leading without following.

There's nothing but death in that.

To overcome, attack with compassion.

To stand firm, defend with compassion.

Whatever heaven sustains it shelters with compassion.

The entire world says that my Tao is great, but

It resembles not what is expected.

Just because of its greatness, it resembles to what is expected.

Otherwise, it would have become insignificant long ago.

I have three treasures, keep and treasure them:

The first is to love,

The second is to conserve, and

The third is dare not be the first in the world.

Be able to conserve, then you can be courageous.

Be able to conserve, then you can be generous.

Dare not to be the first in the world, then you can be the leader.

Now:

To abandon love and be courageous,

To abandon conservation and be generous,

To abandon no be the first in the world and rush ahead.

This is fatal!

Because of love, you will be victorious in battle, and invincible in Defense!

When Heaven is about to save you, it protects you with love.

In
the world each says

My tao is great and seems to lack resemblance

In the end only great therefore seems to lack resemblance.

It looks like resemblance goes with the long-lasting

With what is tiny as well.

In
the end I possess three principles I am obtaining yet defending

One, say compassion

Two, say thrift

Three say lack of venturing to act to precede the world.

Compassion,
so be able to be brave

Thrift, so be able to expand

Lack venturing to act to precede the world

So be able to perfect tools of growth.

Right
now, abandon compassion just to be brave

Abandon thrift just to expand

Abandon being behind just to precede

Death goes with these.

In
the end with compassion

A war happens and next comes conquering

Keeping to it happens and next comes solidity.

The
heavens attain helping

It happens that compassion is defending.

Everyone says the Sage is noble, despite his common air; an air which he gives himself because he is noble (to hide his nobility and not to attract envy to himself). Everyone knows, on the contrary, how much those who pose as nobles are men of little worth.

The Sage prizes three things and holds on to them: charity, simplicity, and humility.

Being charitable, he will be brave (within just limits, without cruelty). Being simple, he will be liberal (within just limits, without waste). Being humble, he will govern men without tyranny.

The men of today have forgotten charity, simplicity, and humility. They prize war, ostentation, and ambition. This is like wishing not to succeed. It is like wishing to perish.

For it is the charitable aggressor who wins the battle (not the savage aggressor); it is the charitable defender who is impregnable (and not the pitiless warrior). Those whom heaven wishes well, are thereby made charitable.

Everyone in the world calls my Tao great

As if it is beyond compare

It is only because of its greatness

That it seems beyond compare

If it can be compared

It would already be insignificant long ago

I have three treasures

I hold on to them and protect them

The first is called compassion

The second is called conservation

The third is called not daring to be ahead in the world

Compassionate, thus able to have courage

Conserving, thus able to reach widely

Not daring to be ahead in the world

Thus able to assume leadership

Now if one has courage but discards compassion

Reaches widely but discards conservation

Goes ahead but discards being behind

Then death!

If one fights with compassion, then victory

With defense, then security

Heaven shall save them

And with compassion guard them

The reason people call the Tao great is because there is nothing quite like it. The Tao is an infinite concept that has no form, shape, substance, limit or boundaries. If it were finite, then no matter how big it is, there will always be something far bigger that dwarfs it into insignificance.

Tao cultivators have three treasures that they cherish. The first is compassion - a love and kindness toward all things. The second is conservation - knowing when and how to avoid wasting one's time and energy, and direct them in a meaningful way, in accordance with one's purpose in life. The third is humility - the awareness that seeing oneself as being above or ahead of other people can only lead to failure.

By having compassion, one gains courage. True courage doesn't come from macho posturing or false bravado. Rather, it comes from love and commitment to something greater than oneself.

By having the mindset of conservation, one understands how to allocate and direct one's efforts to best effect, and therefore reach the most people and have the widest impact.

By having humility, one can connect with the Tao of leadership. Leaders who lead best do not focus on themselves. They have no wish to be the center of attention and prefer to let others shine. They direct their attention to what needs to be done, and do not need to take credit or remind others of their accomplishments.

All three treasures are important and must work together. Courage without compassion would be nothing more than brutality. To reach widely without conserving one's resources will quickly lead to exhaustion. Forgetting the lesson of humility, becoming arrogant, and letting the ego run wild are the beginning stage of self-delusion. These negative consequences can only lead to failure and doom.

Those who hold on to the three treasures can achieve extraordinary feats. Warriors who fight with compassion in their hearts achieve victory, because love gives them the strength they need. If they fight to defend loved ones or a cherished cause, they achieve security and protection.

Because they follow the Tao, Heaven itself will come to their aid, events will seem to conspire in rendering assistance at just the right time, as if they are safeguarded by divine powers. All manners of resources and allies will appear and rally to their cause, in unexpected ways that no one could foresee. Anyone who witnesses this process at work will know that, indeed, the Tao is great beyond compare.

THREE TREASURES

All the world calls Tao great, yet it is by nature immaterial. It is because a thing is seemingly unreal that it is great. If a man affects to be great, how long can he conceal his mediocrity?

Tao has three treasures which he guards and cherishes. The first is called compassion; the second is called economy; the third is called humility. A man that is compassionate can 'be truly brave; if a man is economical he can be generous; if he is humble he can become a useful servant.

If one discards compassion and is still brave, abandons economy and is still generous, forsakes humility and still seeks to be serviceable, his days are numbered. On the contrary if one is truly compassionate, in battle he will be a conqueror and in defence he will be secure. When even Heaven helps people it is because of compassion that she does so.

All under heaven say that my Tao is great,

That it seems useless (pu hsiao).

Because it is great,

Therefore it seems useless.

If it were useful,

It would have long been small.

I have three treasures (pao),

To hold and to keep:

The first is motherly love (tz'u),

The second is frugality (chien),

The third is daring not be at the world's front.

With motherly love one can be courageous,

With frugality one can be wide reaching,

Daring not be at the world's front,

One can grow to a full vessel (ch'i).

Now to discard motherly love, yet to be courageous,

To discard frugality, yet to be wide reaching,

To discard staying behind, yet to be at the front,

One dies!

One with motherly love is victorious in battle,

Invulnerable in defense.

When Heaven wills to save a people,

It guards them with motherly love.

The world says: "Tao is great but seems so foolish!" It seems foolish because it is great. If it did not seem so foolish it would have long since lost its value.

I have three treasures. Guard them and keep them safe! The first is love without which nothing is possible. The second is moderation which is to know the Mystic Balance. The third is humility, to know that you have come from nothing and that you return to nothing. Without these there is no hope.

Love conquers all. There is no defense against it. Tao arms with love those it would protect.

Many consider my teaching to be nonsense.

But the profound is a lot like nonsense.

If a teaching does not seem nonsensical, then it must be trivial.

I have three treasures to guard and preserve:

The first is compassion.

The second is self–restraint.

The third is not wanting to be ahead of others.

Compassion breeds fortitude.

Self–restraint breeds generosity.

Not wanting to be ahead of others breeds leadership.

These days, people want courage without compassion,

generosity without self–restraint, and

leadership without the willingness to be led.

This is death.

Compassion rules!

On the attack, it wins.

On the defense, it holds the fort.

It is Heaven's means of aid and protection.

Sixty-seven

Everyone under heaven says that my Tao is great and beyond compare.

Because it is great, it seems different.

If it were not different, it would have vanished long ago.

I have three treasures which I hold and keep.

The first is mercy; the second is economy;

The third is daring not to be ahead of others.

From mercy comes courage; from economy comes generosity;

From humility comes leadership.

Nowadays
men shun mercy, but try to be brave;

They abandon economy, but try to be generous;

They do not believe in humility, but always try to be first.

This is certain death.

Mercy
brings victory in battle and strength in defense.

It is the means by which heaven saves and guards.

The whole world says that my Tao is great,

Resembling nothing concrete,

Resembling nothing concrete,

Just because it is great.

If it resembled anything concrete,

It would have long become minute.

I have three magic weapons

Which I hold and treasure:

The first is mercy;

The second is thrift;

The third is unwillingness to take the lead in the world.

Being merciful, one can be brave;

Being thrifty, one can be generous;

Being unwilling to take the lead in the world, one can become the leader of the world.

Now seeking bravery by giving up mercy,

Seeking generosity by giving up thrift,

Seeking advance by giving up retreat,

One is bound to end in death.

Being merciful, one will triumph in the offensive

And be impregnable in defense.

If heaven wants to save one,

It must save him with mercy.

All under Heaven says that

My Tao is great yet doesn't look like it [Tao].

Truly, because it is great,

It doesn't look like it.

If it did,

It would have turned out a petty one long ago.

I have three treasures.

I hold and cherish them.

The first is called mercifulness;

The second, frugality;

The third, refusal to be ahead of all under Heaven.

Being merciful, you can therefore be brave;

Being frugal, you can therefore be liberal;

Refusing to be ahead of all under Heaven,

You can therefore become the leader of the vessels.

Now, to be brave, forsaking mercifulness,

To be liberal, forsaking frugality,

To be ahead, forsaking being behind

Is death.

With mercifulness -

If you fight, you will be triumphant,

If you defend, you will be invincible.

Whatever Heaven is about to save

Heaven will protect it with mercifulness.

Everyone says that Dao is so huge that it does not resemble anything we know.

As it is so phenomenally huge, it becomes incomparable.

If it does remotely resemble something on earth, then with the passage of time, its uniqueness will evaporate and gradually become inconsequential.

I steadfastly hold on to my three treasures.

These are compassion, frugality and humility.

With compassion, I can arouse real courage from my subordinates.

With frugality, I would enjoy popular support.

With humility, I become the natural leader.

Let us examine the following scenarios.

Demanding bravery from the subjects without showing compassion towards them,

Expecting popular support without dispensing benefits,

And wanting to become the leader without exhibiting humility.

These are negative attributes that will lead to self-destruction.

By applying compassion in war, you will be triumphant in attack and invincible in defence.

When Providence wants to save a nation,

It does so by bestowing great compassion to its leader.

Three Treasures

San Pao

All the world says I am great

But rather odd and different from the ordinary.

Be it noted that greatness itself is the very reason

Why it appears rather odd and different from the ordinary.

If it had resembled the ordinary,

It would have become pettiness long ago.

I have three treasures.

Keep them and treasure them.

The first is compassion;

The second is frugality;

The third is:

Dare not be first in the world.

Because compassionate, a person can be courageous;

Because frugal, he can expand his scope;

Because he dare not be first in the world, he can develop his gifts of leadership.

Nowadays people are courageous without compassion,

Expand their scope without frugality,

And assume leadership without being humble.

They are doomed!

Compassion is invincible in offense,

And in defense invulnerable.

When Heaven wants to deliver a person from harm,

It grants him compassion as a protective charm.

All the world declares that the Tao of which we speak may be supreme, but nevertheless it baffles definition.

Indeed, it is because it is supreme that it baffles definition.

If it had been definable it would have long since become as negligible as the conventions.

These are my three treasures, which I prize and protect:

The first is compassion; the second is moderation; the third is, not to attempt to be the first among men.

If you are compassionate, you can be truly brave;

If you are moderate, you can be truly generous;

If you do not attempt to be the first among men, you can become the chief of ministers.

But nowadays, if you are brave it is at the expense of compassion;

If you are generous, it is at the expense of moderation;

If you lead, it is at the expense of humility,

And this is death.

For he who fights with compassion will conquer;

He who defends with compassion will hold fast;

Heaven will save him and protect him with compassion.

All beneath heaven say

My Tao seems like folly.

But it is great

Because it seems like folly.

Were it not like folly,

Long indeed would it have been petty.

I have three treasures,

Held close and guarded.

The first is love.

The second is simplicity.

The third is not-daring to be first beneath heaven.

Whoever is loving can be brave;

Whoever is simple can be generous;

Whoever is not-daring to be first beneath heaven

Can be a vessel of excellence.

But to be brave without being loving,

Generous without being simple,

Foremost without being hindmost,

That is to perish!

For love cannot fight without winning.

Cannot defend without strengthening.

When heaven helps,

It protects by loving.

The world may say that the subtle Way of the universe which I describe is great,

but that it has little bearing on worldly life.

Truly, it is just that it is not definable, like the small ways of the world, thus it is indeed great.

There are three treasures which I embrace and follow closely:

the first is to be kind;

the second is to be simple;

the third is to not put one's own importance first in the world.

Because kindness and compassion can produce courage,

simplicity can thus be broadened to contain the world.

By not putting your own importance first in worldly affairs,

you will not impede the natural growth of all things.

If a person endeavors to be brave without first being kind,

great purposed, without first simplifying his life,

an authority, without first denying himself,

he cannot evolve freely from strife, and is only courting destruction.

Kindness can help to win a war.

Kindness can help to defend a fortification.

Kindness will invite the corresponding energy of kindness from Heaven through all the divine beings who support and protect.

LXVII.

Three
Precious Things

All
the world agrees

That
while my Tao is great,

Myself
unseemly seems to be,

Like
one of low estate.

But
because of his unseemliness

Now
only
is
he great,

For
long has mediocrity

Had
seemliness for mate.

Three
precious things I hold,

And
guard with diligence,

Compassionateness,
economy,

And
avoiding precedence.

With
the first I can be brave,

With
the second generous be,

And,
while I shrink from precedence,

Hold
honor s high degree.

But
if they discard compassion,

And
are all for bravery,

Economy,
and still are all

For
generosity,

If
they give up the rearmost place,

And
in front they strive to be,

Tis
death! For compassionateness will give

In
battle victory,

And
Heaven for sure defense will spread

Compassion s
canopy.

In the world many call me great, yet I seem to have no intelligence.

The Master indeed is great, yet he also seems to have no intelligence.

As regards our intelligence, its smallness is of long continuance.

The Master and I have three treasures,

We hold them and prize them.

The first is called "Deep Love,"

The second is called "Protectiveness,"

The third is called "Not planning to be first."

Having Deep Love, you then can have courage.

Having Protectiveness, you then can give freely.

Not planning to be first, you will be a perfect instrument that will endure.

Now, men neglect Deep Love and seek courage,

They put aside Protectiveness and see extravagance.

They leave the second place and seek the first, Then death comes.

The Master fights by means of Love, then he conquers.

He keeps guard by means of it, then he is impregnable.

Heaven will save him and Love will defend him.

All the world says that

my Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ) is great,

but seems strange, like nothing on earth.

But it is just because my Tao ( the Laws of the Universe ) is great that it

is like nothing on earth!

If it were like anything on earth,

how small it would have been from the very beginning!

I have Three Treasures,

Which I hold fast and watch over closely.

The first is Mercy.

The second is Frugality.

The third is Daring to Be Not First in the World.

Because I am merciful,

I can be brave.

Because I am frugal,

I can be generous.

Because I dare not to be first,

I can lead.

If a person wants to be brave

without first being merciful,

generous without first being frugal,

a leader without first wishing to follow,

they are only asking for destruction!

Mercy alone

can help you win a war.

Mercy alone

can help you defend your state.

Heaven will come

to the rescue of the merciful,

and protect them with its Mercy.

All the world says that my Way, though great, seems unconventional.

Indeed, just because it is great, it seems unconventional. If it were unconventional, it would long ago have become minute.

I have three treasures which I hold and preserve.

The first is forbearance.

The second is moderation.

The third is not daring to be first in the world.

Having forbearance, I am able to be courageous.

Having moderation, I am able to be liberal.

Not daring to be first in the world, I am able to become the chief of all the "vessels".

If to-day one rejects forbearance but is only courageous, if one rejects moderation but is only liberal, if one rejects being last but is only first, it is death!

Truly, he who fights with forbearance, conquers; he who guards himself with it is safe.

Him, whom heaven would save, it protects with forbearance.

All the world says that, while my Tao is great, it yet appears

to be inferior (to other systems of teaching). Now it is just its

greatness that makes it seem to be inferior. If it were like any

other (system), for long would its smallness have been known!

But
I have three precious things which I prize and hold fast. The

first is gentleness; the second is economy; and the third is shrinking

from taking precedence of others.

With
that gentleness I can be bold; with that economy I can be

liberal; shrinking from taking precedence of others, I can become a

vessel of the highest honour. Now-a-days they give up gentleness and

are all for being bold; economy, and are all for being liberal; the

hindmost place, and seek only to be foremost;--(of all which the end

is) death.

Gentleness
is sure to be victorious even in battle, and firmly to

maintain its ground. Heaven will save its possessor, by his (very)

gentleness protecting him.

Everybody
say I am great;
great but 'quirky.'
Now,
precisely because I am 'quirky' I can BE great;
were I 'conventional' I would
long ago have been declared 'common.'
I
have always had three treasures that I guard and cherish.
The first is compassion;
the second is simplicity; and the third
is daring to not out-do everyone
in the world.
Now,
because I am compassionate, I find I can be brave;
because I am simple, I
can be generous;
because I dare to not out-do everyone in the world,

I find I can lead in the finishing of tasks.
If
I, today, were to
be courageous while forsaking compassion;
be generous
while forsaking simplicity;
get ahead while forsaking the hindmost;

that would be my end!.. for
compassion in war brings true victory;
in
defense brings invulnerability.
Whomsoever heaven would defend
it surrounds
with a bulwark of compassion.

On
seeing inner nothingness

You see it's great beyond compare

Though many find it curious

That you would even care

I
have three treasures that I keep

The first is friendliness

The second is to stay behind

The third is wanting less

For
if you're friendly and you care

You can dare to do what's needed

And if you always stay behind

The lead will surely be conceded

And
if you're satisfied with less

You have everything to give

Keep these treasures in your heart

Then you will truly live

ALL the world says that my Tao is great, but seems

queer, like nothing on earth. But it is just because

my Tao is great that it is like nothing on earth! If it were

like anything on earth, how small it would have been

from the very beginning!

I have Three Treasures, which I hold fast and watch

over closely. The first is Mercy. The second is Frugality.

The third is Not Daring to Be First in the World. Because

I am merciful, therefore I can be brave. Because I am

frugal, therefore I can be generous. Because I dare not

be first, therefore I can be the chief of all vessels.

If a man wants to be brave without first being

merciful, generous without first being frugal, a leader

without first wishing to follow, he is only courting

death!

Mercy alone can help you to win a war. Mercy alone

can help you to defend your state. For Heaven will

come to the rescue of the merciful, and protect him

with its Mercy.

Many in the world acknowledge the greatness of Tao,

but since it is so vast and far-reaching its greatness is difficult to comprehend.

But as it has been examined and studied for so long, if it were not so great it would long ago have seemed smaller.

I have three great treasures that I cherish and hold fast to.

The first is compassion.

The second is simplicity,

And the third is not trying to be first in anything.

Having compassion I can demonstrate the noblest of courage.

With simple thinking and methods I am able to easily see the heart of things.

And daring to not be first in anything, I can develop my abilities to the situation and accomplish much.

But courage without compassion leads to death,

looking deep into matters without simplicity will bog one down,

and developing ones abilities without taking the time to allow them to adequately mature will result in immature actions.

But all who exhibit compassion in all matters will find their way guarded by the Tao.

Even the mighty warrior will find compassion to be his greatest ally.

Those whom heaven wishes to help are naturally provided with compassion, this is your greatest treasure.

The world talks about honoring the Tao,

but you can't tell it from their actions.

Because it is thought of as great,

the world makes light of it.

It seems too easy for anyone to use.

There
are three jewels that I cherish:

compassion, moderation, and humility.

With compassion, you will be able to be brave,

With moderation, you will be able to give to others,

With humility, you will be able to become a great leader.

To abandon compassion while seeking to be brave,

or abandoning moderation while being benevolent,

or abandoning humility while seeking to lead

will only lead to greater trouble.

The compassionate warrior will be the winner,

and if compassion is your defense you will be secure.

Compassion is the protector of Heavens salvation.

Here is a paradox: even though the single principle of how everything happens is great, those who follow the principle know that they are ordinary.

Great egocentricity does not make a person great. The common ground of all creation is a greater source of life than any exalted isolation.

These three qualities are invaluable to the leader:

- Compassion for all creatures

- Material simplicity or frugality

- A sense of equality or modesty

A compassionate person acts in behalf off everyone's right to life. Material simplicity gives on an abundance to share. A sense of equality is, paradoxically, one's true greatness.

It is a mistake to consider a person whose only interest is self-interest as being either caring or courageous. It is a mistake to rationalize that excessive consumption contributes to the well-being of others by giving them employment. It is a mistake to imagine that a person who acts immodestly or in a superior way is in fact, a genuinely superior person.

These are all egocentric behaviours. They isolate a person from the common ground of existence. They produce rigidity and death.

Compassion, sharing, and equality, on the one hand, sustain life. This is because we are all one. When I care for you, I enhance the harmonious energy of the whole. And that is life.

Everyone says this Tao of mine is great and nebulous.

So great, in fact, that it is too nebulous

To be of any use.

I have three treasures that I hold and cherish:

One is called "compassion"

Another is called "moderation"

And the third is called "daring not to compete."

With compassion, one is able to be brave.

With moderation, one has enough to be generous with others.

Without competition, one is fit to lead.

Nowadays people don't bother with compassion But just try to be brave.

They scoff at moderation

And find they have little enough for themselves.

They step on people in their rush to be first---

This is death!

One who is compassionate in warfare is victorious

And in defense he holds fast.

When Heaven moves to save someone

It protects him through compassion.

Everyone
says that Infinity is great

but beyond comprehension because it is

intangible.

Since it is intangible, it seems non-existent.

However, if it were not intangible it would

have disintegrated before the world was

born.

Three
things create peace and harmony.

The first is a lack of distinctions.

The second is simplicity.

The third is oneness.

With
a lack of distinction, I can accept all things.

With simplicity, I do not become confused with

desire.

With oneness, I can be at peace and in harmony

with all things.

In
the world people always

make distinctions between good and bad

and become confused in judgment;

desire possessions

and become confused in wealth;

forget their oneness

and live in tension and conflict.

Refuse
to make distinctions and refuse to pass

judgment

and war and defense succumb to peace and

harmony.

Everyone under Heaven regards my Tao as Great, resembling nothing else.

Great, yes; that is the reason it resembles nothing else.

If it resembled anything else, it would have slight chance of survival.

I have three Treasures to hold and protect.

The first is Compassion.

The second is Economy.

The third is not presuming to be the First under Heaven.

Compassion permits Courage.

Economy makes Generosity possible.

Not presuming to be the First under Heaven is a quality of Leadership.

Now, abandon Compassion and consider Courage.

Abandon Frugality and consider Generosity.

Abandon Humility and consider Leadership.

Impossible !

Now, Compassion in battle leads to Victory; Compassion in Defense lends

strength.

Heaven will assist the commander who exhibits Compassion.

All under Heaven say that my Tao is great and resembles nothing.1

Because it is great, it resembles nothing.

If it did resemble anything, it would a long time ago have become small.

There are three treasures which I keep and value.

The first is compassion;

The second is frugality;

And the third is not daring to be ahead of others.

Being compassionate, one can be courageous.

Being frugal, one can be generous.

Not daring to be ahead of others, one can lead the world.

But nowadays, there are those who abandon compassion, yet wish to be courageous;

They reject frugality, yet wish to be generous;

They forsake not daring to be ahead of others, yet wish to lead the world.

Their downfall is certain.

Being compassionate, one will win in attack and be strong in defence.

By giving compassion, Heaven provides and protects.2

1. i.e. the Tao cannot be compared to or likened to any of the things normally experienced.

2. This line is ambiguous between 'Heaven is compassionate in providing and protecting' and 'The way that Heaven provides and protects is by making men compassionate'. (See Feng and English, 1973, and Lau, 1963, for the latter interpretation, and Chan, 1969, and Ch'u, 1985, for the former.)

It is said that my Way is the biggest

And nothing could be like it.

Because it is the biggest,

There can be nothing like it.

If there were anything like it,

It wouldn't have been the Way.

I have three things to keep it:

One is motherly love; one is frugality,

And one is the courage to lag behind.

Cherishing motherly love, one can be the bravest.

Being frugal, one can give the most.

Lagging behind, one can grow to the fullest.

The absurdity of today is this:

Foolhardiness is preferred more than motherly love;

Wastefulness preferred more than frugality;

Front positions preferred more than growing to the fullest.

The result can be nothing other than death!

Cherishing motherly love,

An army is invincible,

And unconquerable,

Because it is protected by Heaven with love.

Everyone in the world says of me: 'great - but doesn't seem normal.' It's just 'greatness' - that's why it does not seem normal. If I were normal, I'd have been of little worth for a long time now.

I have three treasures, I protect and keep hold of them. The first is called 'gentleness' the second is called 'frugality' the third is called 'not presuming to act like leader of the world.'

Gentle, so able to be bold frugal, so able to be lavish not presuming to act like leader of the world, so able to become head of a government.

Now: To be bold without being gentle to be lavish without being frugal to act like leader without putting oneself last: This is death.

Yes, gentleness: "Attack with it and you will win defend with it and you will stand firm." When Heaven wants to rescue someone, it surrounds him with a wall of gentleness.

Tao is Great and do not have equals or similar to It!

It resides so deeply and is so subtle that one cannot catch It or force It to do something!

I possess three treasures valuable to me: the first is benevolence, the second is frugality, and the third is that I do not stand ahead of others. I am benevolent, thus I can be brave. I am frugal, thus I can generous. I do not stand ahead of others, thus I can be a wise leader.

He who is brave without love, generous without frugality, who tries to be ahead of others and pushes others away — such a person suffers failure.

One of the contrary, he who is full of love achieves victory. And he is unconquerable because Tao constantly guards him.

Those people following Tao have three main qualities,

Compassion that generates courage,

Caution that generates power,

And modesty that generates influence.

But
people's ordinary actions

Are to glorify a false hero.

To obtain power through force and lack of caution,

To acquire influence by the display of pride.

But
only the one who is compassionate is a true hero,

Only the cautious one is able to obtain real power,

Only the humble one can truly influence people,

Because he in on the Tao path.

Everyone
in the world says that my Dao is great and yet it does not seem so. Now only
because it is great does it not seem so. If it seemed so, then long would it
have been petty. I have three treasures that I uphold and protect: The first
is called compassion, the second is called thrift, the third is not being willing
to be first in the world. Being compassionate, one is able to be brave. Being
thrifty one is able to be generous. Not being willing to be first in the world,
one is able to become the Chief Agent [of the processes of the universe that
constitute the manifestations of the Dao]. Now should one abandon compassion
and yet seek to act bravely, should one abandon thrift and yet seek to be generous,
or abandon one's position at the rear and yet seek to be foremost, then it will
be fatal. And if one wages war with compassion then one will win. If one seeks
to defend something using compassion then it will be secure. What Heaven will
give salvation, it protects by means of compassion.

The whole world says that

My Tao is great but seems to resemble nothing.

Because it is great, it seems to resemble nothing.

If resembling anything, it would have become small long ago.

I have three treasures

To be kept and treasured;

One is compassion.

The second is thriftiness.

The third is not daring to be ahead of the world.

Through compassion, one can be brave.

Through thriftiness, one can be expansive.

Not daring to be ahead of the world,

One can be the master of the vessels.

Now to abandon compassion and to be brave,

To abandon thriftiness and to be expansive,

To abandon the rear and to be in front -

That means death!

Compassion, in attack, will bring victory;

In defense, it will hold firmly.

When heaven is going to save a person,

It will protect him with compassion.

The Power in Compassion

All the world thinks that my Tao is great;

And yet it seems inconceivable.

Only its greatness makes it seem inconceivable.

If it could be conceived of,

It would have become insignificant long ago.

I have Three Treasures that support and protect;

The first is compassion.

The second is moderation.

The third is daring not to be first in the world.

With compassion one becomes courageous;

With moderation one becomes expansive.

In daring not to be first in the world,

One becomes the instrument of leadership.

Now if one is courageous without compassion,

Or expansive without moderation,

Or first without holding back,

One is doomed!

Compassion always triumphs when attacked;

It brings security when maintained.

Nature aids its leaders

By arming them with compassion.

Lao Tzu had just three things to teach: simplicity, patience and compassion. Look into these words and don't know them, but live them.

Everywhere, they say the Way, our doctrine,

Is so very like detested folly;

But greatness of its own alone explains

Why it should be thus held beyond the pale.

If it were only orthodox, long since

It would have seemed a small and petty thing!

I
have to keep three treasures well secured:

The first, compassion; next, frugality;

And third, I say that never would I once

Presume that I should be the whole world's chief.

Given
compassion, I can take courage;

Given frugality, I can abound;

If I can be the world's most humble man,

Then I can be its highest instrument.

Bravery
today knows no compassion;

Abundance is, without frugality,

And eminence without humility:

This is the death indeed of all our hope.

In
battle, 'tis compassion wins the day;

Defending, 'tis compassion that is firm:

Compassion arms the people God would save!

All the people under Heaven say that my Tao is great,

But it is not like anything concrete.

Just because it is great,

It is not like anything concrete.

If it is like something concrete,

It would have been very small for long.

I have three precious things which I hold up and preserve:

The first if "tolerance";

The second is "economy";

The third is "to dare not go ahead of all the people under Heaven."

With tolerance, one can be brave;

With economy, one can be generous;

With not daring to go ahead of all the people under Heaven, one can be a leader.

Now, seeking bravery without tolerance, seeking generosity without economy, and seeking precedence without retreat will only end with death.

With tolerance, one can be victorious in war or strengthen himself in defense.

When Heaven is to save a person, it will protect him through tolerance.

All under Heaven say that my Dao is great but seems to have no likeness [buxiao].

The reason why it seems to have no likeness is that greatness is its only attribute.

If it had a likeness, all this time it would have been insignificant!

I have three treasures, which I hold tight and protect.

The first is called "kindness," the second "frugality," and the third is "no presumption that I am first among all under Heaven."

It is thanks to kindness that one can be brave.

It is thanks to frugality that one can be generous.

It is by not presuming to be first among all under Heaven that one can make one's ready device last long.

Now, if one abandons kindness and takes bravery, abandons frugality and takes generosity, and abandons the back and takes first place, such a one will die!

Thanks to kindness, when one takes the field, he is victorious, and, when he takes a defensive position, he holds firm, for it is Heaven that will save him by protecting him with guards of kindness.

1. The whole world says, I'm Great;

2. Great, yet unlike [everyone else],

3. But it's precisely because I'm unlike [everyone else], that I'm therefore
able to be Great.

4. Were I like [everyone else], for a long time now I'd have seemed insignificant
and small.

5.
I constantly have three treasures;

6. Hold on to them and treasure them.

7. The first is compassion;

8. The second is frugality;

9. And the third is not presuming to be at the forefront in the world.

10. Now, it's because I'm compassionate that I therefore can be courageous;

11. And it's because I'm frugal that I therefore can be magnamimous;

12. And it's because I don't presume to be at the forefront in the world that
I therefore can be the head of those with complete talent.

13. Now, if you abandon this compassion and yet try to be courageous,

14. And if you abandon this frugality and yet try to be magnanimous,

15. And if you abandon this staying behind and yet go to the fore,

16. Then you will die.

17. If with compassion you attack, then you'll win;

18. If you defend, then you'll stand firm.

19.
When Heaven's about to establish him,

20. It's as though he surrounds him with the protective wall of compassion.

Everywhere I
go, people tell me,

"Tao is so powerful, so immense,

it's inconceivable!"

But it's only
powerful

because it's inconceivable.

If we could wrap our minds around it,

Tao would be just another thing.

The three most
important qualities in life

are compassion,

or showing kindness and mercy to others,

moderation,

or knowing what a thing is worth,

and modesty,

or knowing your place in the world.

Courage stems
from showing

kindness and mercy to others.

Generosity starts with knowing

what a thing is worth.

True leadership begins with knowing

your place in the world.

But these days,

I see everyone trying to act courageous

without any trace of compassion.

They try to be generous

but they don't practice moderation

in their own lives.

They act like leaders,

but they have no sense of modesty.

No good can come of this.

If you want
to get ahead,

show people compassion.

When other people attack you,

defend yourself with compassion.

It's the most powerful force in the universe.

.

Three Treasures

Everyone says the Way is great and beyond comparison.

Because it is great, it cannot be compared.

If it were compared, it already would have seemed small.

I have three treasures to be maintained and cherished:

the first is love;

the second is frugality;

the third is not pushing oneself ahead of others.

From love comes courage;

from frugality comes generosity;

from not pushing oneself ahead of others comes leadership.

Now courage without love, generosity without frugality,

and leadership by pushing oneself ahead of others are fatal.

For love wins all battles and is the strongest defense.

Heaven gives love to save and protect.

The world calls my TAO great but myself insignificant.

Yes: the clearer TAO manifests the more meaningless the ego becomes.

Worth nothing and without duration is he who wants to rate and be of importance.

Three treasures I guard which endure: the first is compassion the second frugality the third modesty.

Compassion makes me brave frugality generous modesty a carrier of the eternal.

Today the inconsiderate is called brave the spendthrift generous the go-getter progressive ....

They are progressing away from the essential thing toward decay toward death while the compassionate conquer through gentleness remaining in existence through non-resistance.

Heaven fills with compassion those it wants to preserve.

The Three Treasures

Lao Tze says,

All the people in the world would say that my Tao is too great and that there is nothing similar to compare it with.

Now it is just because of its greatness that nothing similar can be compared with it.

If anything can be found similar to it, for long its smallness has been known.

At the same time, there are three precious things which I prize and hold fast.

The first is charity;

the second is economy;

and the third is shrinking from being the first of the world.

With that charity I can be bold.

With that economy I can be liberal.

Shrinking from being the first of the world, I can become a vessel of the highest value.

Present day kings give up charity, and are all for being bold;

give up economy, and are all for being liberal;

give up following behind, and rush in front;

of which the end is death.

For the result of using charity in battle is sure to be victory,

and firm maintenance of its ground in defense.

Heaven will save its possessor, his charitable attribute will protect him.

THE THREE PRECIOUS ATTRIBUTES

Those
who follow the natural way

are different from others in three respects.

They have great mercy and economy,

and the courage not to compete.

From mercy there comes courage;

from economy, generosity;

and from humility, willingness to lead from behind.

It
is the way of sickness to shun the merciful,

and to acclaim only heroic deeds,

to abandon economy, and to be selfish.

They
are sick, who are not humble,

but try always to be first.

Only
he who is compassionate

can show true bravery,

and in defending, show great strength.

Compassion is the means by which

mankind may be guarded and saved,

for heaven arms with compassion,

those whom it would not see destroyed.

Some say that my teaching is nonsense.

Others call it lofty but impractical.

But to those who have looked inside themselves,

this nonsense makes perfect sense.

And to those who put it into practice,

this loftiness has roots that go deep.

I have just three things to teach:

simplicity, patience, compassion.

These three are your greatest treasures.

Simple in actions and in thoughts,

you return to the source of being.

Patient with both friends and enemies,

you accord with the way things are.

Compassionate toward yourself,

you reconcile all beings in the world.

All in the world may think that Dao is unlike to be so superior, that nothing in the world can compare to it.

If it were comparable to anything, it would be inferior.

If it is not superior, it would not be Dao.

I have three treasured strategies to which I hold fast and embrace them all:

the first is Mercy;

the second is Economy of Force;

and the third is Dare Not to Take Initiative Before the World.

Because of Mercy, one can be courageous.

Because of Economy of Force, one can have superior force.

Because of Dare Not To Take Initiative Before the World, one can be the master of instruments.

Alas!

Nowadays, rulers want to be brave without being merciful;

want to have superior force without knowing economy of force;

and want to take initiative without being able to be resistant.

They will surely die in the war.

Mercy helps one to win when on the offensive;

to consolidate when on the defensive.

If one guides oneself by mercy Heavens will protect him.

Everyone in the world says I am great, great without parallel.

Being without parallel is what enables greatness.

If there is a long-standing parallel, it becomes small.

I always have three treasures:

First is compassion.

Second is frugality.

Third is to not dare act in front of the world.

So compassion enables courage.

Frugality enables abundance.

Not daring to act in front of the world enables the mechanism to endure.

Today there is courage without compassion.

There is abundance without frugality.

There is appearance alone without substance.

This means no-life.

Through compassion: fight and win, defend and be secure.

When the heaven establishes itself, it always relies upon compassion.

LXVII

The
whole world hears these words and says they are beautiful, but over simplified

But it's precisely because they're simple that they can be great

If they tried to be detailed and precise, what use would they be?

There
are only three compasses to steer by; treasure them

Compassion, frugality, and genuineness

Compassion leads to courage

But courage without compassion is pure violence

Frugality leads to affluence

But affluence without frugality is pure extravagance

Genuineness brings honor and respect

But honor and respect gained hypocritically is pure disaster

Attack
with these qualities and you'll never lose

Defend with them, and you'll never fall

Whoever wraps himself in the tao

Finds in it a shield and a sanctuary that will never fail

Everyone Says

Everyone in the world

says my Way is great,

but it seems incomparable.

It is just because it is great

that it seems incomparable:

when comparisons are long established

it becomes trivialized.

I have three treasures

that I keep and hold:

one is mercy,

the second is frugality,

the third is not presuming

to be at the head of the world.

By reason of mercy,

one can be brave.

By reason of frugality,

one can be broad.

By not presuming

to be at the head of the world,

one can make your potential last.

Now if one were bold

but had no mercy,

if one were broad

but were not frugal,

if one went ahead

without deference,

one would die.

Use mercy in war,

and you win;

use it for defense,

and you're secure.

Those whom heaven is going to save

are those it guards with mercy.

People in the world say to me that Tao is great but it resembles nothing.

It is because of the greatness that nothing is like it.

If it were similar to anything, it would have turned trivial long ago.

I have three great treasures - Hold and maintain them.

The first is kindness.

The second is frugality.

The third is the reluctance to be prestigious in the world.

Being kind, one can have courage.

Being frugal, one can grow wide.

Reluctance to be prestigious, one can become the leader.

If one is courageous without kindness, expanding without frugality, and prestigious without modesty, he is doomed to fail.

With kindness, one would win in war, and be secure in defense.

When heaven come to rescue, it guards by using kindness.

All the world says that my Way is great, but seems queer, like nothing on earth.

But it is just because my Way is great that it is like nothing on earth.

If it were like anything on earth, it would have been small from the very beginning.

I have three treasures, which I hold fast and watch over closely.

The first is compassion; the second is frugality; the third is not daring to be first in the world.

Being compassionate, I can be brave; being frugal, I can be generous; daring not be first, I can be the chief.

If a man forsakes compassion for courage, forsakes frugality for expansiveness, forsakes the rear position for front position, he is only courting death!

Compassionate to engage in war, one wins; in defense, one is secure.

When Heaven wants to help a man, it takes compassion to protect him.

Everyone, says that my Tao is great,

seemingly different (from yours).

Because it is great, it seems different.

If it were not different,

it would have vanished long ago.

I have three treasures which I hold and keep.

The first is mercy;

the second is economy (thrifty);

the third is daring not to be ahead of others (which draws jealousy).

From mercy comes courage;

from economy comes generosity;

staying behind ensures maturity and fulfillment.

Nowadays men shun mercy and be brave;

abandon economy and be wasteful;

do not believe in humility, but always try to be the first.

This ensures death.

Mercy brings victory in battle and strength in defense.

If God wants to save him, makes him have mercy.

Everyone under heaven says my Tao is great

and resembles nothing else.

It is because it is great that it seems different.

If it were like anything on earth

it would have been small from the beginning.

I
have three treasures that I cherish and hald fast.

The first is gentleness,

the second is simplicity,

the third is daring not to be first

among all things under heaven.

Because of gentleness I am able to be courageous.

Because of simplicity I am able to be generous.

Because of daring not to be first

I am able to lead.

If
people forsake gentleness and attempt to be courageous,

forsake simplicity and attempt to be generous,

forsake the last place and attempt to get the first place,

this is certain death.

Gentleness
conquers in battle and protects in defense.

What heaven guards, it arms with the gift of gentleness.

People
say that this path is so easy,

simply the way things go

naturally

without trying.

Exactly

because it is so simple, so basic, so minimal

it is so great.

Religion

created from wants and desires, from miracles and visions,

from conflict between mortal and immortal,

is not normal, not natural.

From its ancient manufacture and people's need of it

you can see its smallness.

I
have three commandments

compassion, simplicity, and humility

because

only with compassion is a person able to be truly brave

only by living simply can one be truly generous

only by humility does one become the leader.

Today
your courage is based on the ease of attack and victory, your generosity on
your wealth, not poverty, and your humility on being the first, not the last.
You will die, and it will all pass.

But compassion cannot fight without winning, or give without gaining, or be
nobody without being somebody.

Nature
gives a natural defense of lowliness -- like the "death" of the possum, or the
bared neck of the wolf, the sea depths of the ancient coelacanth -- to that
which it wants to protect.

Every one says my dao is greatly like folly. Just because it's great, it looks
like folly. Great ways don't look like the ordinary anyhow.

If it did not look like folly, it could have turned small and petty long ago!
Then it would have been small. As for things that don't look foolish to common
men, there can be no question about their smallness.

I
have three treasures. Guard and keep them:

The first is a deep, deep concern; call it mystic pity, if you like.

The second is never too much, which may mean frugality.

And the third is refusal to be ahead, foremost or first, for I hardly dare to
be ahead.

Deep,
concerned love brings guts [or fall].

Through not doing too much, one has amplitude (of reserve power): Who has spared,
may then give and seem generous.

Through not presuming to be the first and best there is, one can develop one's
talent and strength; let it mature to dominate a world.

On
the other hand,

to be bold by forsaking deep love;

to be generous by forsaking frugality-won reserves and clever, artful restraint;

and to be ahead and rushing in front by forsaking following behind;

all this could prove fatal in the end.

Ardent,
loving concern can't fight well without conquering a lot. It shall help in the
case of attack, and likewise to be firm in the case of defence.

When heaven is to save a person, heaven will protect him through deep love.
Heaven arms those it would not see beaten, with all right concern. [Let's hope
that.]

All under heaven say that I am great, great but unconventional.

Now,

Precisely because I am unconventional,

I can be great;

If I were conventional,

I would long since have become a trifle.

I have always possessed three treasures that I guard and cherish.

The first is compassion,

The second is frugality,

The third is not daring to be ahead of all under heaven.

Now,

Because I am compassionate, I can be brave;

Because I am frugal, I can be magnanimous;

Because I dare not be ahead of all under heaven, I can be a leader in the completion of affairs.

If, today, I were to

Be courageous while forsaking compassion,

Be magnanimous while forsaking frugality,

Get ahead while forsaking the hindmost,

that would be death!

For compassion

In war brings victory,

In defense brings invulnerability.

Whomsoever heaven would establish,

It surrounds with a bulwark of compassion.

All the world avows that while my Taoism is great, it is yet incompetent!

It is its greatness which makes it appear incompetent.

If it were like others, it would long ago have been recognized as incompetent.

But I hold fast to three precious things, which I also cherish.

The first is gentleness.

The second is economy.

The third is humility.

With such gentleness I can be daring.

With such economy I can be generous.

With such humility I can be great in service, as a vessel of honour.

But in these days men forsake gentleness and become only obtrusive.

They abandon economy and become only excessive.

They relinquish humility and strive for precedence, and thus for death.

Gentleness is ever victorious in attack and secure in defence.

Therefore when Heaven would preserve a man it enfolds him with gentleness.

Return to These Things

In the confusion of a complex world,

clarity of purpose can be lost.

In the bustle of a hurried life,

patience is forgotten.

In the midst of a multitude of distractions,

passion can fade away.

Slow down and think clearly.

Your passion thrives on simple things.

Return to these things.

This week:

Instead of the morning news,

a walk together hand-in-hand;

Instead of a power lunch,

some warm bread, cheese,

and the love poetry of Rumi;

Instead of The Tonight Show,

tender love by candlelight.

All the world says that my Tao is great and does not seem to resemble
(the ordinary). It is precisely because it is great that it does not
resemble (the ordinary). If it did resemble, it would have been small
for a long time.

I have three treasures. Guard and keep them: The first is deep love,
The second is frugality, And the third is not to dare to be ahead of the
world.

Because of deep love, one is courageous. Because of frugality, one is
generous. Because of not daring to be ahead of the world, one becomes
the leader of the world.

Now, to be courageous by forsaking deep love, To be generous by
forsaking frugality, And to be ahead of the world by forsaking following
behind - This is fatal.

For deep love helps one to win in the case of attack, And to be firm
in the case of defense. When Heaven is to save a person, Heaven will
protect him through deep love.

Everyone says
that my way of life is the way of a simpleton.

Being largely the way of a simpleton is what makes it worth while.

If it were not the way of a simpleton

It would long ago have been worthless,

These possessions of a simpleton being the three I

choose

And cherish:

To care,

To be fair,

To be humble.

When a man cares he is unafraid

When he is fair he leaves enough for others,

When he is humble he can grow;

Whereas if, like men of today, he be bold without caring,

Self-indulgent without sharing,

Self-important without shame,

He is dead.

The invincible shield

Of caring

Is a weapon from the sky

Against being dead.

Everyone says my DAO is so great that it does not look like anything.

I say because it is so great, it does not look like anything.

If it were like anything, it would have disappeared long ago.

I have three treasures to keep and protect:

The first is kindness, the second is thrift, and the third is not fighting to be first.

Only if you are kind, can you be brave;

Only if you are thrifty, can you be generous;

Only if you do not fight to be first, can you be a leader.

However, the people today are not kind but brave,

Are not thrifty but generous,

Are not humble but want to be leaders.

These people are destined for failure.

With kindness, when you fight, you will win; when you defend, you will be strong.

If the heavens wants to save someone, it will always give him kindness as his defense.

People say that my Tao is too immense and beyond compare.

However, because it is so immense, it is so different.

If it were not so different,

It would long ago have been reduced to something insignificant.

There are three treasures that I hold and cherish:

The first is tenderheartedness.

The second is thrift.

The third is daring not to be first in the world.

From tenderheartedness comes courage.

From thrift comes generosity.

From humility comes leadership.

If you try to be courageous without being tenderhearted,

If you try to be generous without being thrifty,

If you try to be a leader without learning humility,

You are courting your own self-destruction.

Venture with tenderheartedness and you will win the battle.

Defend with tenderheartedness and you will be invulnerable.

For tenderheartedness is the way Heaven guards you for your inner protection.

It is said that my Way is the biggest

And nothing could be like it.

Because it is the biggest,

There can be nothing like it.

If there were anything like it,

It wouldn't have been the Way.

I have three things to keep it:

One is motherly love; one is frugality,

And one is the courage to lag behind.

Cherishing motherly love, one can be the bravest.

Being frugal, one can give the most.

Lagging behind, one can grow to the fullest.

The absurdity of today is this:

Foolhardiness is preferred more than motherly love;

Wastefulness preferred more than frugality;

Front positions preferred more than growing to the fullest.

The result can be nothing other than death!

Cherishing motherly love,

An army is invincible,

And unconquerable,

Because it is protected by Heaven with love.

Many in the world acknowledge the greatness of Tao,

but since it is so vast and far-reaching its greatness is difficult to comprehend.

But as it has been examined and studied for so long, if it were not so great it would long ago have seemed smaller.

I have three great treasures that I cherish and hold fast to.

The first is compassion.

The second is simplicity,

And the third is not trying to be first in anything.

Having compassion I can demonstrate the noblest of courage.

With simple thinking and methods I am able to easily see the heart of things.

And daring to not be first in anything, I can develop my abilities to the situation and accomplish much.

But courage without compassion leads to death,

looking deep into matters without simplicity will bog one down,

and developing ones abilities without taking the time to allow them to adequately mature will result in immature actions.

But all who exhibit compassion in all matters will find their way guarded by the Tao.

Even the mighty warrior will find compassion to be his greatest ally.

Those whom heaven wishes to help are naturally provided with compassion, this is your greatest treasure.

