===== Chapter 24 =====

Those on tiptoe do not stand.

Those who straddle do not walk.

Those who show themselves do not shine.

Those who affirm themselves are not made known.

Those who brag about themselves are without merit.

Those who throw their weight around are not leaders.

Those who are with the Tao also say:

"Surplus food, useless forms—

Nature perhaps detests them."

Therefore, those who have the Tao do not reside [in such things].

Upon tiptoe: no way to stand. Clambering: no way to walk.

Self-display: no way to shine. Self-assertion: no way to succeed.

Self-praise: no way to flourish. Complacency: no way to endure.

According to Tao, Excessive food, Extraneous activity Inspire disgust. Therefore the follower of Tao Moves on.

Those who stand on tiptoe do not stand firm.

Those who walk in long strides do not walk well.

Those who flaunt themselves do not shine bright.

Those who insist on being right are not renowned.

Those who brag do not succeed.

Those who boast do not last long.

To the follower of Tao they're loathsome.

They're like leftover food or pointless pursuits.

The person of Tao turns away from them.

THE IMPERFECT

Standing on "tip toe", one stands not firmly.

Straining in stride, one cannot walk far.

Flaunting of deeds, one is unfavorably noticed.

Being self-righteous, one is not respected.

Boasting of self, one's merit is unrecognized.

Glorifying of self, one loses the opportunity for greatness.

From the viewpoint of Tao

These represent imperfect Te,

Valued as are filth or disease.

Thus: Those who value the Tao may permit

themselves to avoid these things.

On tiptoes, they cannot be steady.

When they straddle something, they cannot go forward.

Self-display is not the light.

Self-righteousness is not outstanding.

Boasting about yourself is not of service.

Praising yourself cannot endure.

From the point of view of the Tao this is called excessive consumption and redundant actions.

All beings will detest this.

One who follows the Tao does not dwell in excessive consumption and redundant actions.

EVIL MANNERS

He who standeth a-tiptoe standeth not firm; he who maketh rigid his legs

walketh ill. He who preeneth himself shineth not; he who talketh

positively is vulgar; he who boastheth is refused acceptance; he who is

wise in his own conceit is thought inferior. Such attitudes, to him that

hath the view given by understanding the Tao, seem like garbage or like

cancer, abhorrent to all. They then who follow the Way do not admit them.

No one can stand solid when on his toes. No one can run with spreadlegs. Who admires himself will not be venerated. Who is pleased with oneself,the world will not praise. Who praises himself, merits little appreciation.Who pushes for the top, will not be elevated. For the Spirit he is a leftover,an odd growth on the body. The people will look upon him in disdain, Andthose who live by reason will not emulate his like.

One who stands on tiptoe, doesn't stand firmly

One who walks in a forced way, doesn't come far

One who is vain, doesn't shine

One who justifies oneself, isn't credible

One who brags, will be unmasked

One who works one's way up, humiliates oneself

To a wise man these are nothing but follies

One who lives righteously and honestly, refrains oneself from these things

One who tries to stand on tiptoe cannot stand still. One who stretches his legs too far cannot walk.

One who advertises himself to much is ignored. One who is too insistent on his own views finds few to agree with him.

One who claims too much credit does not get even what he deserves. One who is too proud is soon humiliated.

These, when judged by the standards of Nature, are condemned as "Extremes of greediness and self-destructive activity." Therefore, one who acts naturally avoids such extremes.

'He who stands on tip-toe, does not stand firm;

He who takes the longest strides, does not walk the fastest."

He who does his own looking sees little,

He who defines himself is not therefore distinct.

He who boasts of what he will do succeeds in nothing;

He who is proud of his work, achieves nothing that endures.

Of these, from the standpoint of the Way, it is said:

"Pass round superfluous dishes to those that have already had enough,

And no creature but will reject them in disgust."

That is why he that possesses Tao does not linger.

He who stands on tiptoe is unsteady.

He who strides too hard cannot go far.

He who shines a light on himself is not enlightened.

He who asserts himself is not distinguished.

He who praises himself has no merit.

He who brags of his success will not last long.

Observers of Tao see these as spoiled food and pointless action—

shunned even by the myriad creatures.

One who knows Tao does not abide them.

Those who stand on tiptoe do not stand (firmly)

Those who stretch strides do not make progress

Those who display themselves are less than clear

Those who are self-righteous are less than distinguished

Those who assert themselves lack merit

Those who glorify themselves do not endure

To someone on the path here

These suggest excessive indulgence and irrelevant action

Things somehow wrong to have

So those who have the way do not linger

Tumors

One who boasts is not established.

One who shows himself off does not become prominent.

One who makes a show is not enlightened.

One who brags about himself gets no credit;

One who praises himself does not long endure.

In the Way such things are called:

"Extra food and redundant action."

And with things - there are those who hate them

therefore followers of the Tao does not dwell in them.

A man who tiptoes can't stand. A man who straddles can't walk.

A man who shows off can't shine. A man who boasts of his achievements has no merit.

A man who brags will not endure.

To a person of Tao, these things are excess food and superfluous behaviour. Because nothing good can come of them, he doesn't indulge in them.

Standing on tiptoe,

You are easily knocked off balance.

Striding forth in grim pursuit,

You make little progress.

To affect luminosity

Is to dull your natural light.

Dig in your heels,

And you will never endure.

Display yourself,

And you accomplish nothing.

For the mildest conceit reveals the ego-

The parasite of true nature,

A consumptive, gnawing burden-

It is disdained by the Sage.

Rejecting the ego, the Sage reveals

The quiet autonomy of true being.

This verse is about the inner and outer signs of that "parasite of true nature," the ego. Wherever a person is engaged in self-display, the striving after fame, or the ideological rigidity of position-taking, the ego is present. "Standing on tiptoe" can also refer to the attitude of the gossip-addict: a person who strives to be "in the know" or to have "inside information," usually about matters that are properly none of his business. In Lao Tzu's time, as in ours, the halls of government, workplaces, and the media were saturated with such idlers. Perhaps in no other arena is the petty inanity of the hunger for superiority exposed, as the poet also mentions in Chapter 20.

Apart from its outward marks, the ego can be detected inwardly as well: it is "a consumptive, gnawing burden," one that can, the poet suggests, be felt physically, from within one's organic nature. Once the student discovers the signs of ego and can learn to recognize them within himself and in others, he can begin the practice of diminishment—the process of deconstructing the ego's false beliefs and artificial hierarchies.

Whoever stands on tiptoe

is unsteady.

Whoever walks with long strides

cannot long keep up the pace.

Whoever makes a show of himself

cannot shine.

Whoever is self-righteous

cannot gain the respect of the people.

Whoever is self-centered

cannot become loved by others.

Whoever seeks glory

cannot become a true leader.

According
to the Tao

these attitudes are excessive, unnecessary.

Even in earthly matters they are to be avoided.

Therefore the follower of Tao avoids them.

Who tiptoes, totters. Who straddles, stumbles. The self-regarding cannot cognize; the egotistic are not distinguished; the boastful are not meritorious; the self-conceited cannot excel. Such from the standpoint of the Tao are like remnants of food, or parasites, which all things probably detest. Hence, those who possess the Tao are not so.

A man on tiptoe cannot stand firm; A man astride cannot walk on;

A man who displays himself cannot shine; A man who approves himself cannot be noted;

A man who praises himself cannot have merit; A man who glories in himself cannot excel:

These, when compared with Tao, are-called; 'Excess in food and overdoing action.' Even in other things, mostly, they are rejected; Therefore the man of Tao does not stay with them.

Important distinctions

Those who tiptoe do not stand.

Those who stride do not walk.

Those who see for themselves are not discerning.

Those who affirm for themselves are not insightful.

Those who attack it themselves do not achieve.

Those who esteem themselves do not become elders.

When these are in guides, we say:

'Excess provision; redundant action.'

Some natural kinds avoid them.

Hence those who have guides don't place them.

To lift the heel is not to stand.

To take long strides is not to walk.

To show off is not to shine.

To insist that one is right is not to be distinct.

To claim credit is to have no credit.

To be proud of oneself is not to be the best.

From the point of view of Tao, all of these are extras which things themselves do not like.

Therefore, the man of Tao does not abide with them.

He who tiptoes cannot stand.

He who strides cannot walk.

He who sees only himself is not enlightened.

He who is self-righteous is not notable.

He who boasts about himself will have no merit.

He who praises himself will have no improvement.

The way he takes the Tao, as if eating with a full stomach and moving with excess baggage, will be disliked.

Therefore he who follows the Tao will not abide this.

He who boasts cannot stand;

He who looks at himself is not illustrious;

He who parades himself is not clear-sighted;

He who brags about himself has no merit;

He who is conceited does not last long.

These, according to the Tao, are

Leftover food and improper deeds

Which people all loathe.

Therefore, he who possesses the Tao

Does not accumulate.

A person who stands on tiptoe cannot stand firmly on his feet.

A person who spreads his legs cannot walk steadily.

A person who displays himself cannot shine (like a star in the sky).

A person who praises himself will not be praised by others.

A person who glorifies himself will not be famous.

A person who makes himself mighty cannot excel.

All these, in comparison to the Tao, are called:

"A surfeit of food and an excess of action."

They will be tiresome to everyone in other things, too.

Therefore, the man of Tao is not found in their company.

All these are examples of living in a way that goes against nature.

He who tiptoes cannot stand; he who strides cannot walk.

He
who shows himself is not conspicuous;

He who considers himself right is not illustrious;

He who brags will have no merit;

He who boasts will not endure.

From
the point of view of the way these are 'excessive food and useless excresences'.

As there are Things that detest them, he who has the way does not abide in them.

Trouble From Indulgence

One on tiptoe is not steady;

One astride makes no advance.

Seff-displayers are not enlightened,

Self-asserters lack distinction,

Self-approvers have no merit,

And self-seekers stunt their lives.

Before Reason this is like surfeit of food; it is like a wen on the body with which people are apt to be disgusted.

Therefore the man of reason will not indulge in it.

Strive for more, and you lose what you have. Hurry ahead and you will miss something, and then have to go back. Boast of achievements, and they will be lost. Define who you are, and you will lose your true self. Try to control others, and you will be controlled by them. These traits represent wasted energy spent on the ego. The master has long done away with them.

One who tiptoes to stand taller does not stand firm;

One who strides to walk faster does not walk long;

One who self-touts does not shine;

One who self-justifies does not reassure;

One who self-aggrandizes does not accomplish;

One who self-serves does not endure.

They, in relation to Direction, are the equivalent of leftover food and excess fat.

They are unattractive;

they are not held by those with Direction.

Stretch onto tiptoes and you never stand firm.

Hurry long strides and you never travel far.

Keep up self-reflection

and you'll never be enlightened.

Keep up self-definition

and you'll never be apparent.

Keep up self-promotion

and you'll never be proverbial.

Keep up self-esteem

and you'll never be perennial.

Travelers of the Way call such striving too much food and useless baggage.

Things may not all despise such striving, but a master of the Way stays clear of it.

He who stands on tiptoe to be tall is unstable;

He who straddles to be fast is slow.

He who insists on his own views has no clear view;

He who justifies his own errors sees no truth.

He who boasts of his own achievements harms his credibility;

He who is arrogant experiences no growth in wisdom.

From the point of view of Tao,

They are like spoiled food and acts of nuisance which all detest.

Therefore followers of Tao avoid them.

Those
on tiptoe are not standing firmly

Those who stride are not moving

Those who show themselves are not luminous

Those who justify themselves are not conspicuous

Those who boast of themselves are not of outstanding service

Those who brag of themselves are not growing.

They
that join tao also say

Surplus food and redundant actions are somehow disliked

So
those present with tao are not dwelling there.

By dint of holding oneself on tiptoe, one loses one's balance. By trying to take too great a stride, one does not go forward.

By making a show of oneself, one loses one's reputation. Through imposing oneself, one loses one's influence.

Through boasting about oneself, one becomes discredited. Through pushing oneself, one ceases to be augmented.

In the light of the Principle all these ways of acting are odious, distasteful. They are superfluous excesses. They are like a pain in the stomach, a tumour in the body. He who has principles (in conformity with the Principle), does not act like this.

Those who are on tiptoes cannot stand

Those who straddle cannot walk

Those who flaunt themselves are not clear

Those who presume themselves are not distinguished

Those who praise themselves have no merit

Those who boast about themselves do not last

Those with the Tao call such things leftover food or tumors

They despise them

Thus, those who possesses the Tao do not engage in them

The one who stands on tiptoes, in order to raise himself or herself above others, cannot stand for long. The one who straddles in an exaggerated gait cannot walk any significant distance for long.

The one who shows off himself or herself will, ironically, not be clearly perceived by others. The one who thinks he or she is always right will not be considered respectable or admirable by others.

The one who incessantly praises himself or herself is not the person with true merit. The one who is always bragging about his or her achievements is not the person with lasting power.

Those who are on the path of Tao speak of such things as if they were leftover food or useless growth, like a tumor. They despise such things and regard them with contempt. This is why those who possess the Tao do not engage in such activities. They do not show off, presume, or boast.

TROUBLES AND MERIT

It is not natural to stand on tiptoe, or being astride one does not walk. One who displays himself is not bright, or one who asserts himself cannot shine. A self-approving man has no merit, nor does one who praises himself grow.

The relation of these things (self-display, self-assertion, self-approval) to Tao is the same as offal is to food. They are excrescences from the system; they are detestable; Tao does not dwell in them.

One who tiptoes cannot stand.

One who straddles cannot walk.

One who sees himself is not enlightened (ming).

One who justifies himself is not outstanding.

One who shows off (fa) his deeds is not meritorious.

One who boasts (ching) of himself does not lead (chang).

These to a Taoist are called:

Excess nature (yü te) and superfluous actions (shui hsing),

Avoided (o) even by things.

Therefore the Taoist does not indulge (ch'u) in them.

Whoever stands on tiptoe is unsteady; whoever walks with long strides cannot long keep up the pace; whoever makes a show of himself cannot shine; whoever is self?righteous cannot gain the respect of the people; whoever is self?centered cannot become loved by others; whoever seeks glory cannot become a true leader.

According to the Tao these attitudes are exessive, unnecessary. Even in earthly matters they are to be avoided. Therefore the follower of Tao avoids them.

He who stands on tiptoe does not stand firm.

He who walks fast cannot walk far.

He who shows off does not shine forth.

He who pushes will not succeed.

He who boasts will not achieve.

He who praises his own work creates nothing that endures.

These things inspire disgust.

Followers of the Tao spurn them.

Twenty-four

He who stands on tiptoe is not steady.

He who strides cannot maintain the pace.

He who makes a show is not enlightened.

He who is self-righteous is not respected.

He who boasts achieves nothing.

He who brags will not endure.

According to followers of the Tao, "These are extra food and unnecessary luggage."

They do not bring happiness.

therefore followers of the Tao avoid them.

He who stands on tiptoes cannot stand well;

He who walks with great strides cannot walk well;

He who shows off himself cannot become conspicuous;

He who regards himself infallible cannot become illustrious;

He who brags about himself cannot gain achievement;

He who boasts of himself cannot become a head.

From the point of view of the Tao,

These behaviours are like leftover food and superfluous excrescence,

So disgusting that a man of Tao

Never behaves like that.

He who tiptoes cannot remain standing;

He who strides cannot travel;

He who shows himself has no bright presence;

He who claims to be right does not shine;

The boastful have no merit;

The conceited do not last long.

From Tao's standpoint

Such things may be called excess food and superfluous action.

Creatures abhor them.

Therefore the man of Tao stays away from them.

He who stands tiptoed will soon fall over.

He who walks with huge strides will not go very far.

By trying to show off, you will not be eminent.

By acting like a know-all, you will not be distinguished.

If you brag about your success, you will end up with no credit.

If you are conceited, you will not make any further advancement.

From the perspective of Dao,

Even animals will find all extravagant deeds disgusting.

He who follows the path of Dao does not subscribe to these actions.

Bitter Favors

K'u En

He who stands on tip-toe will totter;

He who takes long strides is a poor walker.

He who likes to show off is not enlightened;

He who is prone to be self-righteous is not distinguished;

He who blows his own horn will acquire no merit;

He who extols himself is not fit to be a leader.

From the standpoint of Tao, it can be said:

"Eating excessive food or to walk with a burden

May be disgusting to creatures."

People possessed of Tao, therefore, reject them.

"If you stand on tiptoe you will not stand firm.

With legs astride, you will not go forward."

Make a display of yourself and you will not shine;

If you assert yourself you wil not therefore be distinguished.

If you vaunt yourself you will not acquire merit.

If you glorify yourself you will not excel.

Such excesses, viewed from the Tao,

Are like excess in eating or unmannerly behaviour,

Which everywhere arouse distaste.

The man of Tao gives them short shrift.

On tiptoe you don't stand.

Astride you don't walk.

Showing yourself, you don't shine.

Asserting yourself, you don't show.

Boasting yourself won't get you credit.

Vaunting yourself won't let you endure.

In Tao, these things are called

Tumors and dregs, which all things abhor.

Whoever has Tao does not dwell on them.

One who stands on tiptoe cannot stand firmly.

One who strides cannot walk far.

One who flaunts himself is not illumined.

One who insists that he is right is self-righteous.

One who boasts of his accomplishments undoes his merit.

One who takes pride in himself impedes his own growth.

These things are normally detested by people who nurture virtue and the truthfulness of life,

for they do not set their eyes and hearts upon anything that is equal to "the greed for excessive food which fosters morbid growth."

Thus, such things are not agreeable to them.

XXIV.

Hindering
Grace

A man
who stands on tiptoe can t be still,

A man
with legs astride walks not with skill,

He
who is self-displaying is not bright,

He
who is self-asserting sheds no light,

lie
that boasts himself no merit gains,

He
who is self-conceited there remains.

Conditions
such as these with Tao compared

Are
like left-over food too long prepared,

Excrescences
men loathe, like wart or spot,

And
those who follow Tao dwell with them not.

He who stands on tiptoe is not steady,

He who holds legs stiffly cannot walk.

He who looks at self does not see clearly.

He who asserts himself does not shine.

He who boasts of himself has no merit.

He who glorifies himself shall not endure.

These things are to the Tao like excreta or a hideous tumour to the body.

Therefore he who has Tao must give them no place.

One
on tip-toe

cannot
stand solid.

Sitting
on a horse

you
cannot walk.

Who
shows off

does
not shine

.
Who brags

has
no glory.

Who
boasts of ability

has
no merit.

Who
parades success

will
not last.

In
Tao (the Laws of the Universe) these things are called

"unwanted
food and

extra
growths,"

Are
rejected

by
all things

.
A person of the Tao (the Laws of the Universe)

does
not want them.

They
turn away from them.

On tiptoe one does not stand.

Straddle-legged one does not go forward.

He who displays himself, shines not.

He who asserts himself, is not manifest.

He who boasts, succeeds not.

He who is conceited, does not become chief.

(Of such an attitude) in regard to the Way it may be said: "Superfluous food and redundant actions are loathed by all. Therefore, he who has the Way, does not concern himself with them."

He who stands on his tiptoes does not stand firm; he who stretches

his legs does not walk (easily). (So), he who displays himself does

not shine; he who asserts his own views is not distinguished; he who

vaunts himself does not find his merit acknowledged; he who is self-

conceited has no superiority allowed to him. Such conditions, viewed

from the standpoint of the Tao, are like remnants of food, or a tumour

on the body, which all dislike. Hence those who pursue (the course)

of the Tao do not adopt and allow them.

Who is puffed-up cannot stand.
Who is self-important has not importance.

Exhibitionists do not really shine.
Egotists have no real merit.

Flatter yourself and you will not last long!
As
for THOU, we may say it sees all such things as 'extra baggage.'
The Fatherly
Light does not reward such trivialities. Therefore, one who
aspires
to THOU does not abide in them.

Who
stands on tiptoe topples

Who runs ahead soon looses speed

Who goes on show is hidden

Who pushes far gives up the lead

Don't
depart from what is given

The ever present here and now

Don't overreach and don't oppose

Invite, admire and allow

ONE on tip-toe cannot stand.

One astride cannot walk.

One who displays himself does not shine.

One who justifies himself has no glory.

One who boasts of his own ability has no merit.

One who parades his own success will not endure.

In Tao these things are called "unwanted food and extraneous growths,"

Which are loathed by all things.

Hence, a man of Tao does not set his heart upon them.

He who stands on his tiptoes does not stand firm

he who travels at a speed beyond his means,

cannot maintain his pace.

He who tries to shine dims his own light.

If you boast, you will have no merit.

Pride yourself and you will not endure.

These behaviors are wasteful and indulgent,

so they attract disfavor;

therefore those who pursue

the Tao do not accept and allow them.

Those who stand on tiptoes

do not stand firmly.

Those who rush ahead

don't get very far.

Those who try to outshine others

dim their own light.

Those who call themselves righteous

can't know how wrong they are.

Those who boast of their accomplishments

diminish the things they have done.

Compared
to the Tao, these actions are unworthy.

If we are to follow the Tao, we must not do these things.

Trying too hard produces unexpected results:

- The flashy leader lacks stability.

- Trying to rush matters gets you nowhere.

- Trying to appear brilliant is not enlightened.

- Insecure leaders try to promote themselves.

- Impotent leaders capitalize on their position.

- It is not very holy to point out how holy you are.

All these behaviours come from insecurity. They feed insecurity. None of them helps the work. None contributes to the leader's health.

The leader who knows how things happen does not do these things.

Consider:

When do you think that you are so good, what are you comparing yourself with? God? Or your own insecurities?

Do you want fame? Fame will complicate your life and compromise simplicity in your comings and goings.

Is it money? The effort of trying to get rich will steal your time.

Any form of egocentricity, of selfishness, obscures your deeper self and blinds you to how things happen.

One who stands on tiptoe does not stand firm.

One who rushes ahead is likely to trip.

One who listens only to himself cannot learn.

One who considers himself righteous, isn't.

One who brags, has nothing to brag about.

One who feels sorry for himself does not grow.

Compared to the Tao, these people are table scraps and wasted effort,

and not well-liked by anyone or anything.

So, if you follow the Tao, you will not live like that.

Stand
on your toes and you will not maintain your

balance.

Run and you will have to rest.

Keep
a harmonious pace

and you can circumnavigate the earth.

Draw
attention to yourself and others may

consider you a fool.

Become self-righteous and others will avoid you.

Boasting impresses no one.

Brag and you may be put to the test.

Within
the oneness of Infinity,

all these are delusions of the physical

world.

They do not bring peace and harmony.

Be at one with Infinity and keep these in

perspective.

They are transient excesses in a transient

universe.

He who stands on tiptoe, does not stand firmly.

He who crosses over, does not proceed.

The self-centered are not discerning.

The self-absorbed are not distinguished.

The boaster is not effective.

The proud are not Leaders.

On the road, excess food means extra work.

Such things are undesirable, and the traveller avoids them.

Those who stand on tiptoe are not steady.

Those who stride out ahead will soon fall behind.

Those who make a big show are far from enlightenment.

Those who think they can never be wrong are not respected.

Those who justify themselves have no merit.

Those who boast will not last long.

To followers of the Tao, such actions are excessive, like eating too much.

They are disliked by all things,

And therefore followers of the Tao do not seek refuge in them.

A long stander would not stand on tiptoe.

A far walker would not walk with long strides.

A wise observer would not observe self-preoccupations.

A true celebrity would not brag about self.

A successful doer would not show off his/her deeds.

A good ruler would not look superior to others.

It is the Way that is enabling and disabling.

Eating too much will result in obesity in form,

Which is avoided even by the public,

And is therefore not preferred by Way servers.

"A person on tiptoe is not firmly planted a person in a rush will not go far."

One who shows off will not shine one who promotes himself won't become famous

one who boasts of himself will get no credit one who glorifies himself will not become leader.

In Tao this is called 'Stuffing oneself','overdoing it.' Things seem to detest this, so the ambitious man does not dwell here.

He who stands on tiptoes cannot stand for long.

He who walks with long strides cannot walk for long.

He who is seen by everyone cannot keep power for long.

He who praises himself cannot win glory.

He who lives pitying himself becomes weak and cannot develop.

He who is envious cannot achieve success by himself.

He who praises himself cannot gain prestige.

He who indulges in gluttony does meaningless things; everything irritates him. Such a person cannot find peace.

Looking from Tao one can see that all this is caused by vicious desires. All this is absurd behavior. Everyone turns away from such people.

Man who aspires to mergence with Tao does not do anything like that.

Standing on toes, the posture isn't stable,

Crossing the legs, one cannot walk,

The one praising himself, doesn't shine,

Who is arrogant isn't appreciated,

Speaking highly of oneself, one doesn't have merit,

The conceited one isn't respected.

The one on the Tao Way avoids these people.

Those
who rise on tiptoe do not stand firm. Those who straddle as wide as possible
cannot move. Those who show themselves off are not luminous. Those who justify
themselves are not illustrious. Those who boast of themselves have no merit.
Those who brag on themselves do not stand senior to others. In respect of the
Dao, these [behaviors] are said to be leftovers and excrescences. Creatures
always loath them, and so those who have the Dao do not involve themselves therewith.

Those who rise on tiptoe cannot stand.

Those who stride cannot walk.

Those who hold to their views cannot be enlightened.

Those who are self-righteous cannot shine.

Those who boast cannot receive credit.

Those who are arrogant cannot last long.

In the light of Tao, they are like left-over food and burdensome wens,

Even despised by all creatures.

So those with Tao do not want to stay with them.

Nature rarely speaks

Those who are on tiptoe cannot stand firm.

Those who straddle cannot walk.

Those who display themselves cannot illuminate.

Those who define themselves cannot be distinguished.

Those who make claims can have no credit.

Those who boast cannot advance.

To those who stay with the Tao,

These are like excess food and redundant actions

And are contrary to Natural Law.

Thus those who possess teh Tao turn away.

Balance on one leg and you will fall. Reach for the fruit that is ungraspable and you will starve. Do your work and then rest. Live in the Dao.

On tiptoe your stance is unsteady;

Long strides make your progress unsure;

Show off and you get no attention;

Your boasting will mean you have failed;

Asserting yourself brings no credit;

Be proud and you will never lead.

To
persons of the Way, these traits

Can only bring distrust; they seem

Like extra food for parasites.

So those who choose the Way,

Will never give them place.

He who wants to stand higher on tiptoe is not steady;

He who wants to double his step is unable to hasten;

He who only rests on his own eyes cannot see clearly;

He who considers himself always in the right cannot tell right from wrong;

He who boasts himself will be given no credit;

He who considers himself superior is not qualified for leadership.

From the point of Tao, (all these) are nothing but remnants of food and tumours of action, which all creatures detest.

Therefore those who possess Tao will stay away from them.

One up on tiptoes does not stand firm.

One who takes big strides does not move.

One who flaunts himself does not shine.

One who insists that he is right is not commended.

One who boasts about himself has no acknowledged merit.

One filled with self-importance does not last long.

In respect to the Dao, we can say about such behavior, too much food is an excrescence making the rounds.

The people always hate this, so one who has the Dao has nothing to do with it.

1. One who boasts is not established;

2. One who shows himself off does not become prominent;

3. One who puts himself on display does not brightly shine;

4. One who brags about himself gests no credit;

5. One who praises himself does not long endure.

6.
In the Way, such things are called:

7. "Surplus food and redundant action."

8. And with things—there are those who hate them.

9. Therefore, the one with the Way in them does not dwell.

Keep your feet
firmly planted

unless you want to fall on your face.

Learn how to pace yourself

if you want to get anywhere.

Don't call attention to yourself

if you want people to notice your work.

Nobody respects
people who always have excuses.

Nobody gives credit to people who always take it.

People who hype themselves

don't have anything else to offer.

Think of being
in touch with Tao like eating at a buffet:

Put on your plate only as much as you need.

Save some for everybody else.

.

Avoid Excess

Those who stand on tiptoe are not steady.

Those who strain their strides cannot long keep up the pace.

Those who display themselves do not illuminate.

Those who justify themselves are not distinguished.

Those who make claims are not given credit.

Those who seek glory are not leaders.

According to the Way these are like extra food and waste,

which all creatures detest.

Therefore followers of the Way avoid them.

One who stands on tiptoe does not stand firm.

One who walks astride does not get on

One who tries to shine is not illumined.

One who asserts himself has no importance.

One who throws his weight about carries no weight.

One who exalts himself is no Exalted One.

Such an attitude is of little use to the Tao as refuse is to the preservation of the body.

One who has TAO keeps away from it.

Those Which Are Against The Tao

Lao Tze says,

He who stands on tiptoe can't persist long.

He who walks by striding can't go far.

He who sees everything in his eyes can never be shrewd.

He who claims self-righteousness will never be exalted by others.

He who steals others' feats for himself is a worthless person.

He who boasts of his merit can't enjoy a long life.

Viewed from the Tao's standpoint, these men are like remains of a meal, or a tumor on the body, which no one would like.

Hence, a Tao-practician should not become one of them.

EXCESS

He
who stretches

beyond his natural reach,

does not stand firmly

upon the ground;

just as he

who travels at a speed

beyond his means,

cannot maintain his pace.

He
who boasts

is not enlightened,

and he who is self-righteous

does not gain respect

from those who are meritous;

thus, he gains nothing,

and will fall into disrepute.

Since
striving,

boasting and self-righteousness,

are all unnecessary traits,

the sage considers them excesses,

and has no need of them.

He who stands on tiptoe

doesn't stand firm.

He who rushes ahead

doesn't go far.

He who tries to shine

dims his own light.

He who defines himself

can't know who he really is.

He who has power over others

can't empower himself.

He who clings to his work

will create nothing that endures.

If you want to accord with the Tao,

just do
your job, then let go.

One on tiptoe can not stand well.

One with hard breathing can not live long.

One astride can not walk well.

A self-displayer is not enlightened.

A self-asserter is not popular.

A self-approver has no merit.

A self-boaster can not lead.

From the point of view of Dao this is called "surfeit of food and a tumour on the body".

It is hated by everything!

Thus a man of Dao will never resort to it.

Those who boast of themselves lose their stance.

He who displays himself is not seen.

He who justifies himself is not understood.

He who lashes out does not succeed.

He who builds himself up does not endure.

In the sense of Tao,

This is said to be eating too much and acting too much.

It results in disgust.

Those who desire will not endure.

XXIV

Raise
yourself too high, and you lose your balance

Prominence does not come from putting on airs

Inner light is not made by clothes or jewels

Nor does respect come from boasts

Honor is not a thing you can claim for yourself

To
the taoists all this is a waste

Like spending hours cooking food no one wants to eat

Why offer people air instead of substance?

Air is free, and only fools and flatterers will buy it

Do you want to be surrounded by fools?

Where
you are is where you are

Live there

Those on Tiptoe Don't Stand Up

Those on tiptoe don't stand up,

those who take long strides don't walk;

those who see themselves are not perceptive,

those who assert themselves are not illustrious;

those who glorify themselves have no merit,

those who are proud of themselves do not last.

On the Way, these are called overconsumption and excess activity.

Some people disdain them,

so those with the Way abstain.

On tiptoes, one cannot stand steadily.

Astride, one cannot walk ahead.

Those who brag about themselves cannot be held in great respect.

Those who assume they are always right cannot be outstanding.

Those who go to the extreme cannot achieve goals.

Those who are vainglorious cannot keep making progress.

This is Tao.

Those behaviors, like leftover food or an overweight person, are unattractive to everyone.

Thus Tao followers avoid them.

One on tip-toe cannot stand.

One astride cannot walk.

One who displays himself does not shine.

One who justifies himself has no glory.

One who boasts of his own work has no merit.

One who is proud of himself will not endure.

From the point of view of the Way, these things are called "unwanted food and extraneous growths," which are loathed by all things.

Hence, a man of the Way does not set his heart upon them.

Stands on tiptoe, is not steady.

Strides, cannot maintain the pace.

Self display, cannot attract audiences.

Self justifying, will not be distinguished.

Self boasting, will not gain respect.

Self bragging, will not endure.

The above are baggages, even things (and animals) despise them.

Followers of the Tao avoid them.

The person on tiptoe is not steady.

The person with legs astride cannot walk.

Those
who look only at thernselves see little.

Those who justify themselves are not distinguished.

Those who brag have no merit.

The work of prideful people will not endure.

From
the standpoint of the Tao,

these things are

"excessive food and tumors of the body."

As they bring sickness, followers of the Tao do not linger around them.

On
tiptoes

I am not steady.

With long strides

I do not walk the fastest or the farthest.

Looking around to see who can be seen

is blindness.

Making myself the center of attention

I am lost.

Judging others

I find myself lacking.

With great claims and projects

I will accomplish nothing.

Pride will bring me a future

in which no one knows who I am.

In nature such traits

are excessive and wasteful.

They rot the person.

Natural beings

avoid them.

Who stands on tiptoe, doesn't stand steady;

He who takes the longest strides, doesn't walk.."

He who does his own looking sees little, and he who shows or reveals himself
is hardly luminous

He who justifies and defines himself isn't subsequently distinct.

He who boasts of what he will do succeeds in nothing;

Who brags doesn't endure for long. Who is proud of his work, achieves nothing
well lasting.

Such people are like remnants of food and tumours of action from the dao point
of view. Good braggarts could be dregs. So it's said

"Pass round superfluous dishes to those that have already had enough,

Such things of disgust all are likely to detest and reject in disgust."

So the man of dao spurns them. The man that has dao doesn't stay to bray and
show off.

Who is puffed up cannot stand,

Who is self-absorbed has no distinction,

Who is self-revealing does not shine,

Who is self-assertive has no merit,

Who is self-praising does not last long.

As for the Way, we may say these are "excess provisions and extra baggage."

Creation abhors such extravagances.

Therefore,

One who aspires to the Way, does not abide in them.

By standing on tiptoe one cannot keep still.

Astride of one's fellow one cannot progress.

By displaying oneself one does not shine.

By self-approbation one is not esteemed.

In self-praise there is no merit.

He who exalts himself does not stand high.

Such things are to Tao what refuse and excreta are to the body.

They are everywhere detested.

Therefore the man of Tao will not abide with them.

Pushing Does Not Bring Maturity

If you are always pushing yourself

your love will not come to maturity.

Pushing implies a preconceived direction

while maturity considers many directions.

Striving for great achievement narrows focus,

while maturity opens to many options.

Devotion to your career brings power and reputation,

while maturity brings devotion to each other.

Work a modest number of hours,

then go home.

At home there is no need for pushing,

no need for striving.

Here at home your love finds its full expression.

He who stands on tiptoe is not steady. He who strides forward does not go.

He who shows himself is not luminous. He who justifies himself is not prominent.

He who boasts of himself is not given credit. He who brags does not endure for long.

From the point of view of Tao, these are like remnants of food and
tumours of action, Which all creatures detest. Therefore those who
possess Tao turn away from them.

Standing tiptoe
a man loses balance,

Walking astride he has no pace,

Kindling himself he fails to light,

Acquitting himself he forfeits his hearers,

Admiring himself he does so alone.

Pride has never brought a man greatness

But, according to the way of life,

Brings the ills that make him unfit,

Make him unclean in the eyes of his neighbor,

And a sane man will have none of them.

You cannot stand firm by standing on tiptoes.

You cannot go far by taking big steps.

If you are stubborn, you cannot know the right and the wrong.

If you are narrow-minded, no one will accept your opinions.

If you show off, no one will recognize your accomplishments.

If you are conceited, you will not be able to lead the people.

Speaking in terms of the DAO, these are useless extras that are very annoying.

Therefore, one who practices the DAO never behaves like this.

A man who tiptoes cannot stand.

A man who straddles cannot walk.

A man who flaunts himself cannot shine.

A man who is self-righteous is not respected.

A man who is self-boasting is not acknowledged.

A man who is self-conceited is not promoted.

From the viewpoint of the Tao,

These behaviors are like excess food and excrescent flesh.

Creation abhors such imbalance,

And thus the man of the Tao does not abide in them.

A long stander would not stand on tiptoe.

A far walker would not walk with long strides.

A wise observer would not observe self-preoccupations.

A true celebrity would not brag about self.

A successful doer would not show off his/her deeds.

A good ruler would not look superior to others.

It is the Way that is enabling and disabling.

Eating too much will result in obesity in form,

Which is avoided even by the public,

And is therefore not preferred by Way servers.

He who stands on his tiptoes does not stand firm

he who travels at a speed beyond his means,

cannot maintain his pace.

He who tries to shine dims his own light.

If you boast, you will have no merit.

Pride yourself and you will not endure.

These behaviors are wasteful and indulgent,

so they attract disfavor;

therefore those who pursue

the Tao do not accept and allow them.

