===== Chapter 76 =====

[At] a man's birth, he is flexible and weak.

[At] his death, he is firm and strong.

[At] the birth of trees and grasses, they are flexible and light.

[At] their death, they are dried out and withered.

Therefore, those who are firm and strong are followers of death.

Those who are flexible and weak are disciples of life.

Therefore

The strong army is necessarily destroyed.

The strong tree necessarily snaps.

The strong and large occupy the inferior position.

The flexible and weak occupy the superior position.

Humans are born soft and weak. They die stiff and strong.

The ten thousand plants and trees Are born soft tender, And die withered and sere.

The stiff and strong Are Death's companions The soft and weak Are Life's companions.

Therefore the strongest armies do not conquer, The greatest trees are cut down.

The strong and great sink down. The soft and weak rise up.

Living people are supple and soft.

When they're dead they are rigid and hard.

Living plants are pliant and green.

When they're dead they're unbending and dry.

Thus what's rigid and hard accompanies death

And what's pliant and soft accompanies life.

If a soldier's too strong, he will suffer defeat.

If a tree is too hard it will be cut down.

The strong and big go down.

The soft and weak go high.

THE HARD AND THE SOFT

At birth, as in life, mankind is gentle, soft and weak.

In death, he becomes hard and rigid.

All creatures and All Things -

While alive and growing are soft and supple.

When dead, become withered, tough, brittle and dry.

Hard, rigid, withered, tough, brittle and dry,

Being companions of death -

Gentle, soft, weak and supple are

Companions of life.

Thus -

The hard weapon will be broken.

The hardwood tree will be cut down.

The hard and the mighty are cast down.

The soft and the weak are exalted.

When people are born, they are soft and yielding.

When people die, they are stiff and unyielding.

Ten-thousand things (everything) like grass and trees, when they are born, they are soft and supple.

When they die, they are rigid and dry.

Stiffness and unyielding are death's companions.

Softness and yielding are life's companions.

Unyielding armies will not win.

Unyielding trees become weapons.

Great strength dwells below.

Weakness dwells above.

A WARNING AGAINST RIGIDITY

At the birth of man, he is elastic and weak; at his death, rigid and

unyielding. This is the common law; trees also, in their youth, are

tender and supple; in their decay, hard and dry.

So
then rigidity and hardness are the stigmata of death; elasticity and

adaptability, of life.

He
then who putteth forth strength is not victorious; even as a strong

tree filleth the embrace.

Thus
the hard and rigid have the inferior place, the soft and elastic the

superior.

Man at his birth is supple and weak: at his death, firm and strong.(so it is with) all things. Trees and plants, in their early growth, aresoft and brittle; at their death, dry and withered. Thus it is that firmnessand strength are the concomitants of death; softness and weakness, theconcomitants of life. Hence he who (relies on) the strength of his forcesdoes not conquer; and a tree which is strong will fill the outstretchedarms, (and thereby invites the feller.) Therefore the place of what isfirm and strong is below, and that of what is soft and weak is above.

When a human being is born, it's supple and weak

When it dies it's stiff and strong

Everything that's alive (take a look at grass and trees for example)

Is supple and flexible

And when they die they are shriveled and parched

Therefore hardness and inflexibility are companions of death

And suppleness and softness, companions of life

That's why a rigid troublemaker will never win

And an inflexible tree is doomed to death

Inflexibility and power won't get you very far

Suppleness and softness get you everywhere

At birth a man is soft and weak - yet capable of living the whole life ahead of him. At death he is hard and tough - yet unable to live for even a minute longer.

All things, whether plants of animals, while living, are soft and weak, But, when dead, are hard and tough.

Thus hardness and toughness are allied with death, While softness and weakness are interrelated with life.

This is the reason why the tougher fighters are more likely to be killed, and the harder trees more likely to be cut down.

Therefore it is better to be soft and weak than to be hard and tough.

When he is born, man is soft and weak;

In death he becomes stiff and hard.

The ten thousand creatures and all plants

And trees while they are alive are supple and soft,

But when and dead they become brittle and dry.

Truly, what is stiff and hard is a "companion of death";

What is soft and weak is a "companion of life".

Therefore "the weapon that is too hard will be broken,

The tree that has the hardest wood will be cut down".

Truly, the hard and mighty are cast down;

The soft and weak set on high.

A man is born supple and soft.

At death he is rigid and hard.

The ten thousand things, the grass, the trees,

while living are tender and pliant.

In death they are dry and withered.

The hard and unbending are companions of death.

The soft and yielding are companions of life.

Thus, an inflexible army is easily defeated.

An unbending tree is easily broken.

The hard and strong are laid low.

The soft and yielding are raised up.

People, while they live, are adaptable & soft

When they are dead, are hard & stiff

The myriad beings, the plants and the trees,

while they live, are supple & delicate

When they are dead, are weathered & tough

And so the hard & inflexible are companions to death

The adaptable & soft are companions to life

This is why the unbending military will not,

in due course, be triumphant

The rigid tree is then struck down

The strong & great belong underneath

The adaptable & soft belong above

Flexability

When people are born, they are supple and soft;

When they die, they end up stretched and stiff;

When the ten thousand things, grasses and trees are alive,

They are supple and pliant;

When they are death they are withered and dried out.

Therefore we say that the firm and rigid

are the companions of death,

While the supple, the soft, the weak and the delicate

are the companions of life.

If a soldier is rigid, he will not win;

If a tree is rigid, it will come to its end.

Rigidity and power occupy the inferior position;

Suppleness, softness, weakness and delicateness

At birth a person is soft and yielding, at death stiff and hard.

All beings, the grass, the trees: alive, soft, and yielding; dead, stiff, and hard.

Therefore the hard and inflexible are friends of death. The soft and yielding are friends of life.

An unyielding army is destroyed. An unbending tree breaks.

The hard must humble itself or be otherwise humbled. The soft will ultimately ascend.

When we are born,

We are soft and tender.

After we die,

We become rigid and brittle.

A living tree can sway,

A living blade of grass can bend,

For suppleness is the strength of life.

Only in death is flexibility stilled.

Tough and taut is the body of death;

Gently moving is the way of life.

Powerful forces crush themselves

Because they cannot move or yield.

A stiff and heavy tree will soon be broken

By wind or by axe.

Thus does rigid power always crumble,

While the supple and the humble

Gently endure.

Living, man is supple and yielding;

when dead, man is hard and stiff.

Living, animals and plants are soft and pliant;

when dead, they are withered and brittle.

Being
inflexible and unyielding is part of dying;

being flexible and yielding is part of living.

A headstrong legion will lose in war just

as an unyielding tree will snap under the axe.

The
place of the strong is below;

the place of the gentle is above.

At birth man is supple and weak, at death rigid and strong. So with inanimate nature – say the vegetable creation – in its early growth it is pliable and brittle, at death it is decayed and withered. It follows that rigidity and strength are the way to death; pliability and gentleness the way to life.

Hence a soldier who is arrogant cannot conquer; the tree which is strong is doomed.

The firm and the great occupy the lower place, the pliable and the meek the higher.

Man when living is soft and tender; when dead he is hard and tough. All animals and plants when living are tender and fragile; when dead they become withered and dry. Therefore it is said: the hard and the tough are parts of death, the soft and the tender are parts of life. This is the reason why soldiers when they are too tough cannot carry the day; the tree when it is too tough will break. The Position of the strong and great is low, and the position of the weak and tender is high.

Strength's Warning Signs.

The human living state is soft and pliable.

The dead state is hard and rigid.

The alive state of the ten-thousand natural kinds --grass and wood--is soft
and crisp.

Their dead state is hard and dry.

So things that are hard and rigid accompany death.

Things that are soft and pliable accompany life.

So if troops are strong they do not triumph.

When wood is stiff, it makes weapons.

When strength is great, its place is down.

When soft and pliable, its place is up.

When a man is alive,

His body is soft and frail.

After his death,

It is hard and solid.

When grass and trees are growing,

They are delicate and fragile.

After their deaths,

They are wizened and decayed.

Therefore, what is hard is close to death.

What is soft is close to life.

Thus, when troops are inflexible, they lose the war.

When a wood board is dried hard, it cracks.

What is strongest and most solid remains low.

What is softest and meekest remains high.

A man is soft and weak when living.

But hard and rigid when dead.

The myriad creatures and grass and plants, when living, are soft and fragile.

When dead, they are dried and withered.

That is why the hard and the rigid are the disciples of death, the soft and the weak the disciples of the living.

Therefore an army which is inflexible cannot win.

A plant which is hard will break.

The strong and hard will fall.

The soft and weak will overcome.

When born, man is soft and weak;

When dead, he is stiff, tough, hard and strong.

When born, the ten thousand things,

Grasses and trees are soft and tender;

When dead, they are withered and dry.

Therefore, it is said:

"The hard and strong belong to the category of death;

The soft and weak belong to the category of life."

Hence, if an army is strong, it perishes;

If a tree is strong, it breaks.

Therefore, the strong and big rank low;

The soft and weak rank high.

The living person is soft and pliant, and is hard and rigid in death.

All creatures and plants,

Are soft and vulnerable in life,

And dry and brittle in death.

Therefore it is said:

The hard and the rigid are part of death,

The soft and gentle are part of life.

This is the reason why soldiers who are too rigid

Do not triumph.

When the tree is too rigid, it will break.

The stance of the strong and the great is stooped,

The stance of the weak and the small is erect.

A man is supple and weak when living, but hard and stiff when dead.

Grass and trees are pliant and fragile when living, but dried and shrivelled
when dead.

Thus the hard and the strong are the comrades of death;

The supple and the weak are the comrades of life.

Therefore
a weapon that is strong will not vanquish;

A tree that is strong will suffer the axe.

The strong and big takes the lower position,

The supple and weak takes the higher position.

Beware of Strength

Man during life is tender and delicate. When he dies he is stiff and stark.

The ten thousand things, the grass as well as the trees, while they live are tender and supple. When they die they are rigid and dry.

Thus the hard and the strong are the companions of death. The tender and the delicate are the companions of life.

Therefore he who in arms is strong will not conquer.

When a tree has grown strong it is doomed.

The strong and the great stay below. The tender and the delicate stay above.

When a baby is born, it is soft and flexible. When a man dies he is static and stiff. A living plant bends and flowers. Dead, it is brittle and barren. Stiff and static, you are as if dead. Flexible and soft, you are a beacon of life. That which is stiff and brittle will easily snap, and be destroyed. That which is soft and flexible will bend, and endure.

At birth, one is soft and tender;

at death, hard and stiff.

At the beginning, flora are tender and crisp;

at the end, brittle and dry.

Thus, hardness and stiffness symbolize death; softness and tenderness, life.

Thus, an army, hard and stiff, is annihilated; a tree, hard and stiff, is cut.

Hard and stiff are inferior; soft and tender, superior.

People are soft and weak in life,

hard and strong in death.

The ten thousand plants and trees are soft and frail in life,

withered and brittle in death.

Things hard and strong follow death's ways and things soft and weak follow life's:

so it is that strong armies never overcome and strong trees always suffer the axe.

Things great and strong dwell below.

Things soft and weak dwell above.

A human body is weak and pliable at birth, and is stiff and hard at death.

Grass and trees are tender and soft at birth, and are dry and brittle at death.

Therefore,

The hard and strong belong to the company of death;

The soft and weak belong to the company of life.

It follows then:

A strong army is destined to be destroyed;

A hard wood tree is doomed to be broken.

The hard and strong are in an inferior position,

The soft and weak are in a superior position.

The
life of man is also yielding, weak

His death is also rigid, unyielding.

The 10000 things, the grass and trees

Their living is also yielding, fragile

Their dying is also dried up, withered.

So that which is rigid, unyielding is the pupil of dying

That which is yielding, weak is the pupil of living

Appropriately
it happens that

With unyielding soldiers, next comes lack of conquering

With an unyielding tree, next comes being attacked.

Dwelling
in the unyielding and great is worse

Dwelling in the yielding and supple is better.

When a man is born he is supple and weak (but full of life); he becomes strong and powerful, and then he dies.

It is the same for plants, delicate (herbaceous) at first, then becoming woody at the time of their death.

He who is strong and powerful is marked for death; he who is weak and flexible is marked for life.

The great army will be defeated. The great tree will be cut down.

Everything that is strong and great is in a poorer condition. The advantage is always with the supple and the weak.

While alive, the body is soft and pliant

When dead, it is hard and rigid

All living things, grass and trees,

While alive, are soft and supple

When dead, become dry and brittle

Thus that which is hard and stiff

Is the follower of death

That which is soft and yielding

Is the follower of life

Therefore, an inflexible army will not win

A strong tree will be cut down

The big and forceful occupy a lowly position

While the soft and pliant occupy a higher place

Life is characterized by softness and pliancy, while death is characterized by stiffness and rigidity. We can see this simply by looking around. Living plants and animals all exhibit flexibility and suppleness. When they are dead, their lifeless forms invariably lose all moisture, and therefore all flexibility and supplement as well.

We can generalize from this observation and link death to that which is hard and unyielding. Life would be linked that which which is pliable and thus capable of growth and adaptation. This applies not only to flora and fauna but also to all aspects of human existence.

For instance, an army that cannot adapt to the ever-changing conditions on the battle field will soon find itself outmaneuvered and defeated by an enemy that is more nimble and flexible. A tree that grows hard and strong makes excellent timber, and so will quickly find itself chopped down and put to use. Both are great examples where rigidity leads to death.

Therefore, that which is forceful and aggressive may seem to have the upper hand, but in fact occupies a lower position of disadvantage. Conversely, being yielding and flexible may be perceived as a weakness, but is in fact a great strength that occupies a higher position leading to victory and success.

Notes

As mentioned above, this Tao principle pervades all aspects of life. That is why the hard sell never yield long-term success. Salesmen who study "closing techniques" and apply pressure to seal a deal are not the ones with the best results, the most satisfied customers, and repeat business.

Master practitioners of the soft sale - the salesmen who apply no pressure, but only provide attention, service, and assistance to customers, and thereby win their trust. Once the trust has been earned, no techniques are necessary to close the transaction. That trust may also lead to repeat business as well as referrals.

BEWARE OF STRENGTH

When a man is living he is tender and fragile. When he dies he is hard and stiff. It is the same with everything, the grass and trees, in life, are tender and delicate, but when they die they become rigid and dry.

Therefore those who are hard and stiff belong to death's domain, while the tender and weak belong to the realm of life.

Therefore soldiers are most invincible when they will not conquer. When a tree is grown to its greatest strength it is doomed. The strong and the great stay below; the tender and weak rise above.

At birth a person is soft (jou) and yielding (jo),

At death hard (chien) and unyielding (ch'iang).

All beings, grass and trees, when alive, are soft and bending,

When dead they are dry and brittle.

Therefore the hard and unyielding are companions of death,

The soft and yielding are companions of life.

Hence an unyielding army (ping) is destroyed (mieh).

An unyielding tree breaks (che).

The unyielding and great takes its place below,

The soft and yielding takes its place above.

When living, man is supple and yielding; when dead, man is hard and stiff. When living, all animals and plants are soft and pliant; when dead, they are withered and brittle. Thus being inflexible and unyielding is part of dying; being flexible and yielding is part of living.

Thus, a headstrong legion will lose in war just as an unyielding tree will snap under the axe. The place of the strong is below; the place of the gentle is above.

People are born soft and flexible;

when they are dead, they are hard and stiff.

Living plants are tender and pliant;

when they are dead, they are brittle and dried out.

Therefore, whatever is hard and stiff is a sign of death.

Whatever is soft and flexible is a sign of life.

An army without flexibility never wins.

An unbending tree is easily brought down by the wind.

The hard and stiff fall.

The soft and flexible rise.

Seventy-six

A man is born gentle and weak.

At his death he is hard and stiff.

Green plants are tender and filled with sap.

At their death they are withered and dry.

Therefore the stiff and unbending is the disciple of death.

The gentle and yielding is the disciple of life.

Thus
an army without flexibility never wins a battle.

A tree that is unbending is easily broken.

The
hard and strong will fall.

The soft and weak will overcome.

While alive, a man's body is supple;

When dead, it becomes hard.

While alive, grass and trees are supple;

When dead, they become dry and stiff.

Thus the hard and strong is of the dying sort;

The supple and weak is of the living sort.

That is why the army, having grown strong, will be wiped out,

And the tree, when grown up, will be cut down.

Thus the strong and big is inferior

To the weak and supple.

People are soft and weak when born,

But bard and strong when dead.

Plants are soft and supple when born,

But dry and shriveled when dead.

Therefore the hard and strong are companions of death,

The soft and weak are companions of life.

Therefore a strong weapon loses,

A strong tree breaks.

The strong and big belong below,

The soft and weak belong above.

When a person is alive and kicking, his body is soft and pliable.

When he is dead, his body is rigid and stiff.

Living plants are soft and supple.

Dead plants become dried and stiff.

Therefore, hard and stiff epitomises the dead.

Soft and supple typifies the living.

Hence, when an army flaunts its might, it will be defeated.

As the tree grows big and tall, it will be felled.

The strong and powerful should occupy the lower position.

While the meek and weak should be sitting atop.

Abstain from Hardness

Chieh Ch'iang

Man is soft and weak at birth;

At death he is hard and rigid.

The ten thousand things, herbs and trees,

Are soft and delicate when growing up;

In dying, they wither and look haggard.

Thus hardness and rigidity are companions of death;

Softness and weakness are companions of life.

Therefore armies, having become rigid, will not win;

Trees, having become rigid, will break asunder.

The big and rigid will be laid low;

The soft and weak will be lifted up.

Men at birth are weak and tender;

Men in death are rigid and hard.

All creatures, trees and plants are soft and tender in their early growth,

And in dying become withered and dry.

Thus we may say that rigidity and hardness are related to death,

While weakness and tenderness are related to life.

Therefore, the soldier who depends on strength will not conquer;

The tree that has grown too hard will be felled.

For the tree that has grown too hard will be felled.

For the place of the strong and mighty is below,

And the place of the weak and tender is above.

A man lives soft and weak,

Dies hard and stiff.

The grass, the trees, the then thousand things

Live soft and supple,

Die brittle and dry.

Hence

The hard and stiff

Are followers of death;

The soft and weak

Are followers of life.

For

When armies are stiff, they will lose;

When trees are stiff, they will fall.

The stiff and mighty will be cast down;

The soft and weak will be lifted up.

When a person is alive, he is soft and supple.

When a person dies, he becomes hard and rigid.

When a plant is alive, it is pliant and tender.

When a plant is dead, it becomes dry and brittle.

Hence, the hard and rigid are companions of the dead.

The soft and supple are companions of the living.

Therefore, a mighty army is ready to be vanquished.

A tree that is dry is ready for the ax.

The mighty and the great will be laid low.

The soft and the gentle will outlive them all!

LXXVI.

Caution
Against Strength

Man
in his life is tender and weak,

He
dies, and is rigid and strong,

Trees
and grass in their life are supple and weak,

They
die, and are stiff as a prong;

What
accompany life are the tender and weak,

And
death are the stiff and the strong.

The
conqueror fails who relies on his strength,

The
tree in its strength the woodman will chop,

The strong
and the great will stay under, at length
,,

And
the tender and weak on the top.

In life, man is soft and tender,

In death, he is rigid and hard.

In life, plants and trees are soft and pliant,

In death, they are withered and tough.

Thus rigidity and hardness are companions of death.

Softness and tenderness are companions of life.

That is why the soldier who trusts only in strength does not conquer,

The tree that relies on its strength invites the axe.

Great strength dwells below,

Softness and tenderness dwell above.

When a person is living

they are soft and easy to bend.

When they are dead,

they become hard and stiff.

When a plant is living,

it is soft and tender.

When it is dead,

it becomes withered and dry.

The hard and stiff

belongs to the company

of the dead:

The soft and easy to bend

belongs to the company

of the living.

A mighty army

can to fall

by its own weight,

Just as dry wood

is ready

for the ax.

The mighty

and great

will be put low;

The humble

and weak

will be raised high.

Man at birth is soft and weak; at death he is hard and rigid.

The ten thousand things, plants and trees, while alive, are soft and fragile; at death they are dry and withered.

For, what is hard and rigid is a follower of death; what is soft and weak is a follower of life.

Therefore, is a weapon is too rigid, it is destroyed; if a tree is too rigid, it breaks.

What is hard and rigid is placed below; what is soft and weak is placed above.

Man at his birth is supple and weak; at his death, firm and

strong. (So it is with) all things. Trees and plants, in their early

growth, are soft and brittle; at their death, dry and withered.

Thus
it is that firmness and strength are the concomitants of

death; softness and weakness, the concomitants of life.

Hence
he who (relies on) the strength of his forces does not

conquer; and a tree which is strong will fill the out-stretched arms,

(and thereby invites the feller.)

Therefore
the place of what is firm and strong is below, and that

of what is soft and weak is above.

Human beings are
soft and supple when alive,
stiff and straight
when dead.
The
myriad creatures, grasses and trees are
soft and supple when alive,

dry and withered when dead.
Therefore
it is said:
the rigid person is a disciple of death;
the soft, supple
and delicate are lovers of life.
The
army that is inflexible will not conquer;
the tree that cannot bend will
snap!
The
unyielding and mighty will be brought low;
the soft, supple and delicate
will rise above them.

We're
soft and supple when we're born

Hard and rigid when we die

Living plants are pliable

Deadwood is brittle and dry

This
way life befriends the weak

But death draws near the strong

The hard and stiff are bound to break

The supple bends and goes along

WHEN a man is living, he is soft and supple.

When he is dead, he becomes hard and rigid.

When a plant is living, it is soft and tender.

When it is dead, it becomes withered and dry.

Hence, the hard and rigid belongs to the company of the dead:

The soft and supple belongs to the company of the living.

Therefore, a mighty army tends to fall by its own weight,

Just as dry wood is ready for the axe.

The mighty and great will be laid low;

The humbie and weak will be exalted.

At birth a person is soft and supple; at their deaths they are firm and strong.

All creatures, plants and trees are born tender and flexible,

when they are dead they become brittle and dried.

Thus it is that people who are stiff and hard are companions of death.

The soft and yielding are the followers of life.

It can be seen that a great inflexible army will fall under it's own weight,

just as a stiff unyielding tree will break in the wind.

Dwelling in an inflexible unyielding manner will bring downfall.

The pliant and supple will survive.

The living are soft and yielding;

the dead are rigid and stiff.

Living plants are flexible and tender;

the dead are brittle and dry.

Those
who are stiff and rigid

are the disciples of death.

Those who are soft and yielding

are the disciples of life.

The
rigid and stiff will be broken.

The soft and yielding will overcome.

At birth, a person is flexible and flowing. At death a person becomes rigid and blocked.

Consider the lives of plants and trees: during their time of greatest growth, they are relatively tender and pliant. But when they are full grown or begin to die, they become tough and brittle.

The tree which has grown up and become rigid is cut into lumber.

The rigid group leader may be able to lead repetitious and structured exercises but can't cope with the lively group process.

Whatever is flexible and flowing will tend to grow. Whatever is rigid and blocked will atrophy and die.

When people are alive they are soft and weak.

At their death they are hard and rigid.

All young things, including grass and trees

Are soft and frail.

At their death they are withered and dry.

So, All that are hard and rigid take the company of death.

Those who are soft and weak take the company of life.

Therefore, powerfu weapons will not succeed

(Remember that strong and tal trees

are the ones that are cut down).

The strong and rigid are broken and laid low.

The soft and weak will always overcome.

The
human body is born soft and supple;

after death it is hard and stiff.

Plants and trees are pliant and limber

when they sprout,

after death they are inflexible and

rigid.

Therefore,
hard and inflexible

are characteristics of death.

Pliant and flexible

are characteristics of life.

Thus,
an army that is inflexible will be conquered

and a tree that does not yield to

the wind will snap.

The
hard and inflexible will succumb.

The pliant and flexible will endure.

At birth, a man is soft and weak.

At death, he is strong and powerful.

From grass to trees, all things begin life weak and frail.

At death, they are withered and dry.

Therefore, the Strong and Powerful are disciples of Death.

The Soft and Weak are disciples of Life.

Thus military strength does not ensure Victory.

A tree's strength is like the army;

the Big and Strong decline,

the Soft and Weak prevail.

When living, a man is supple and soft;

But dead, he is hard and stiff.

The myriad creatures, including grass and trees, when living, are pliant and frail;

But dead, they are withered and dry.

Therefore the hard and the stiff are disciples of death,

Whilst the supple and the soft are disciples of life.

An inflexible army cannot win.

A tree that cannot bend will break.

The hard and inflexible take the lower position.

The soft and weak take the higher position.1

1. i.e. hard and inflexible is inferior to soft and weak.

Life is soft and weak, death is hard and strong.

Plants are soft or fragile while living

And wither and harden while dying.

Therefore death grows in strength and hardness,

And life grows in softness and weakness.

A strong army perishes and a strong tree breaks.

What is hard and strong should not be valued,

And "the Above" should keep soft and weak.

People begin life Soft and Weak when they are dead they are hard and firm.

Among the thousands of things: Grass and trees begin life Soft and tender when they are dead they are withered and brittle.

Yes, strength and hardness accompany death Softness and Weakness accompany life.

And so: With a battle axe too hardened, you cannot win when a tree becomes hard, then comes the axe.

The strong and the great stand lowest the Soft and Weak stand highest.

The body of man at birth is gentle and lithe, but after death it becomes hard. All vegetal beings are also gentle and lithe at birth, and after death they become dry and easily broken.

A powerful tree either breaks in storm or is cut down by axe. The lithe and gentle tree has an advantage here.

He who is gentle and lithe walks the path of life. He who is not gentle and lithe walks the path of death.

The human being is born fragile and sensible,

When dying it is inflexible and stiff.

The offshoots are flexible and fragile,

When plant is old, they become stiff and die.

What
is strong and stiff is the sign of death,

What is weak, fragile and sensible is the sign of life.

A
stiff tree is hard to bend,

When blown by a strong wind is broken.

What is not flexible will die,

What is heavy and stiff falls to the ground,

What is light is carried far away by the wind.

In
life people are soft and supple. In death they are hard and rigid. Among the
myriad creatures, the grasses and trees in life are pliant and crisp, But in
death they are brittle and withered. So the hard and rigid are the disciples
of death, and the soft and supple are the disciples of life. For that reason,
when armies are powerful they will not win. When trees are rigid they will be
terminated. The rigid and large take the lower position while the soft and supple
take the upper position.

In life, man is supple and tender.

In death, he becomes rigid and stark.

Myriad things such as grass and trees are supple and frail in life,

And shrivelled and dry in death.

Therefore, the rigid and stark are disciples of death,

While the supple and weak are disciples of life.

Therefore the army that uses strength cannot win.

The tree that stands firm will break.

The strong and large are subordinate;

The soft and weak are superior.

The Power in Flexibility

A man living is yielding and receptive.

Dying, he is rigid and inflexible.

All Things, the grass and trees:

Living, they are yielding and fragile;

Dying, they are dry and withered.

Thus those who are firm and inflexible

Are in harmony with dying.

Those who are yielding and receptive

Are in harmony with living.

Therefore an inflexible strategy will not triumph;

An inflexible tree will be attacked.

The position of the highly inflexible will descend;

The position of the yielding and receptive will ascend.

The tiny goldfish that stands up to a shark will be a tasty dinner. The tiny goldfish that swims around the danger will see another day.

Alive, a man is supple, soft;

In death, unbending, rigorous.

All creatures, grass and trees, alive

Are plastic but are pliat too,

And dead, are friable and dry.

Unbending
rigor is the mate of death,

And wielding softness, company of life:

Unbending soldiers get no victories;

The stiffest tree is readiest for the ax.

The strong and mighty topple from their place;

The soft and yielding rise above them all.

Man ahs a soft and weak body when he is alive,

Whereas his body becomes hard and rigid after his death.

All things, grasses and trees have tender twigs and branches when they are alive,

Whereas they become dry and withered when they are dead.

Therefore the hard and strong belong to death,

Whereas the soft and weak belong to life.

Thus the armed forces will be shattered when they become strong,

And trees will be broken when they grow strong.

The hard and strong are in the inferior position,

And the soft and weak are in the superior position.

While alive, humans are soft and pliable, but, when dead, they are hard and stiff.

While alive, plants, trees, and all the other myriad things are also soft and fragile, but, when dead, they are dried up and withered.

Thus it is that the hard and stiff are adherents of death, and the soft and pliable are adherents of life.

This is why, if military power is stiff, it will not be victorious.

If a tree is stiff, it will be attacked.

The stiff [strong] and great occupy a position below.

The soft and pliant occupy a position above.

1. When people are born, they're supple and soft;

2. Whey they die, they end up stretched out firm and rigid;

3. When the ten thousand things and grasses and trees are alive, they're supple
and pliant;

4. When they're dead, they're withered and dried out.

5. Therefore we say that the firm and rigid are compassions of death,

6. While the supple, the soft, the weak, and the delicate are compassions of
life.

7. If a soldier is rigid, he won't win;

8. If a tree is rigid, it will come to its end.

9. Rigidity and power occupy the inferior position;

10. Suppleness, softness, weakness, and delicateness occupy the superior position.

A baby's body
is soft and gentle.

A corpse is hard and stiff.

Plants and trees are tender

and full of sap.

Dead leaves are brittle and dry.

If you are rigid
and unyielding,

you might as well be dead.

If you are soft and flexible,

you are truly alive.

Soldiers trained
to fight to the death will die.

A tree that cannot bend with the wind

will snap.

Here's a useful
saying:

The harder they come,

the harder they fall.

Here's another:

The meek shall inherit the earth.

.

Life Is Tender

When people are born, they are tender and supple.

At death they are stiff and hard.

All things, like plants and trees,

are tender and pliant while alive.

At death they are dried and withered.

Therefore the stiff and hard are companions of death.

The tender and supple are companions of life.

Thus strong arms do not win.

A stiff tree will break.

The hard and strong will fall.

The tender and supple will rise.

Man is soft and supple when he is born rigid hard and stiff when he dies.

Grasses and trees are pliant yielding and tender while they are growing dry hard and strong when they disbecome.

That is why rigidity and strength pertain to death softness and tenderness, to life.

One who relies on strength does not conquer.

A strong tree is cut down first.

The strong and hard go down the soft and tender rise.

Strong and Weak

Lao Tze says,

A man at his living is tender and weak and at his death adamant and strong.

Living creatures and plants at their living are soft and supple and at their death dry and withered.

Thus those who are adamant and strong are the concomitant of death;

and soft and weak, the concomitant of life.

Hence he who relies on the strength of his forces can not win,

and a tree which grows to be strong will invite the feller.

Hence the rule:

The big and the strong stay underneath and the soft and the weak exist above.

AGAINST TRUSTING IN STRENGTH

Man
is born gentle and supple.

At death, his body is brittle and hard.

Living plants are tender,

and filled with life-giving sap,

but at their death they are withered and dry.

The
stiff, the hard, and brittle

are harbingers of death,

and gentleness and yielding

are the signs of that which lives.

The warrior who is inflexible

condemns himself to death,

and the tree is easily broken,

which ever refuses to yield.

Thus the hard and brittle will surely fall,

and the soft and supple will overcome.

Men are born soft and supple;

dead, they are stiff and hard.

Plants are born tender and pliant;

dead, they are brittle and dry.

Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible

is a disciple of death.

Whoever is soft and yielding

is a disciple of life.

The hard and stiff will be broken.

The soft and supple will prevail.

A living person is gentle and tender, while a dying person is rigid and hard.

A living plant is gentle and tender, while a dying plant is dry and withered.

Thus, one who is rigid and hard is on the way to die.

One who is gentle and tender is on the way to live.

Thus, a strong army will soon be annihilated.

A hard stick of wood will soon be broken.

A piece of hard leather will soon be split.

Teeth are stronger than lips, yet the teeth decay first.

Therefore, hardness and strength are inferior, gentleness and tenderness are superior.

When people are born, they are soft and gentle.

When they die, they are stiff and callous.

When myriad things, grasses and trees, are born, they are soft and tender.

When they die, they are withered.

So stiffness and callousness are the company of death.

Softness and suppleness are the company of life.

The powerful army will not win.

A stiff tree will break.

So stiffness and power stay below.

Softness and suppleness stay above.

LXXVI

When
people are born they are supple and soft

When they die they are stiff and hard

What is full of life is lithe and moist and resilient

What is drained of it is brittle, withered, dry

The former are the marks of life

While the latter are the marks of death

If a soldier is stiff, whether with fear or pride, he will be defeated

If a tree is stiff, it will fall to the next wind

If you become stiff to raise yourself above others, you will fall

Let yourself fall, be supple and responsive, and you will be lifted

When People Are Born

When people are born they are supple,

and when they die they are stiff.

When trees are born they are tender,

and when they die they are brittle.

Stiffness is thus a companion of death,

flexibility a companion of life.

So when an army is strong,

it does not prevail.

When a tree is strong,

it is cut for use.

So the stiff and strong are below,

the supple and yielding on top.

When alive, people are pliable and soft; at death, people become rigid and hard.

When alive, grasses and trees are flexible and tender; at death, they become withered and rotten.

Therefore, rigidity leads to death, flexibility results in survival.

It is because of this, the inflexible army would be defeated, like stiff trees would be broken by wind.

The big and rigid would be overtaken by the nimble and flexible.

When a man is living, he is soft and supple.

When he is dead, he becomes hard and rigid.

When a plant is living, it is soft and tender.

When it is dead, it becomes withered and dry.

Hence, the hard and rigid belongs to the company of the dead; the soft and supple belongs to the company of the living.

Therefore, a mighty army will not win, just as hard tree is ready for the axe.

The mighty and great are below; the soft and weak are above.

The flesh of living is soft,

hard and stiff after death.

Green plants are tender and filled with sap,

withered and dry after death.

Therefore, the stiff and unbending (meaning strong) is the sign of death.

The gentle and yielding, the sign of life.

Thus an army without flexibility, never wins a battle.

A tree that is unbending, easily broken.

The hard and strong will fall.

The soft and weak will overcome.

At birth you are supple and soft.

At death you are stiff and hard.

Grass and trees are pliant and tender when living,

but they are dry and brittle when dead.

Therefore, the stiff and hard are attendants of death,

the supple and soft are attendants of life.

Thus,
the hard weapon will be broken.

The mighty tree will invite the axe.

Therefore,
the hard and mighty belong below;

the yielding and gentle belong above.

At
birth a human is soft and flexible,

at death a human is hard and fixed.

In life all things, plants and animals,

are soft and flexible,

but

in death all things

are hard and fixed.

What is hard and fixed is death's friend;

what is soft and flexible is life's friend.

The
hard and fixed weapon will break,

the hardwood tree will be cut down,

the high shall be made low,

the first shall be last,

the poor and the meek

will win.

When man is born, he is tender and weak. In death he becomes stiff and hard.

All things, the grass as well as trees, are supple and soft while alive. When
dead they become brittle and dried.

So hardness and stiffness very often accompany death, the soft and gentle could
be companions of life.

The headstrong army will lose in battle. They say "the weapon that's too hard
will be broken, the tree that has the hardest wood will be cut down". Yes, a
hard tree will be cut down.

So the hard and mighty eventually should be cast down; and the soft and weak
may be set on high.

Human beings are soft and supple when alive, stiff and straight when dead.

The myriad creatures, the grasses and trees are soft and fragile when alive, dry and withered when dead.

Therefore, it is said:

The rigid person is a disciple of death;

The soft, supple, and delicate are lovers of life.

An army that is inflexible will not conquer;

A tree that is inflexible will snap.

The unyielding and mighty shall be brought low;

The soft, supple, and delicate will be set above.

Man at his birth is supple and tender, but in death he is rigid and strong.

It is the same with everything.

Trees and plants in their early growth are pliant and soft, but at the end they are withered and tough.

Thus rigidity and strength are concomitants of death, but softness and gentleness are companions of life.

Therefore the warrior who relies on his strength cannot conquer death, while the powerful tree becomes a mere timber support.

For the place of the strong and the firm is below, while that of the gentle and yielding is above.

The Cosmos Still Waits in Those Eyes

In your early days together

your souls and bodies opened to each other.

You moved with grace and ease

and your days and nights were filled

with new and wondrous thoughts.

If you remain delighted with each new moment

and open to surprises,

you are on the path of life.

If you have become rigid and bored,

complaining and criticizing when faced with change,

you are on the path of death.

There was a time when dreams and plans took wings.

Your beloved's eyes contained the cosmos,

inviting you to travel to distant worlds.

Why have you narrowed your vision?

Circumstances have changed

and life has dealt you blows.

But the cosmos still waits in those eyes.

Look carefully.

When man is born, he is tender and weak. At death he is stiff and hard.

All things, the grass as well as the trees, are tender and supple while alive. When dead, they are withered and dried.

Therefore the stiff and the hard are companions of death. The tender and the weak are companions of life.

Therefore, if the army is strong, it will not win. If a tree is stiff, it will break.

The strong and the great are inferior, while the tender and the weak are superior.

Man, born tender
and yielding,

Stiffens and hardens in death.

All living growth is pliant,

Until death transfixes it.

Thus men who have hardened are 'kin of death'

And men who stay gentle are 'kin of life.'

Thus a hard-hearted army is doomed to lose.

A tree hard-fleshed is cut down:

Down goes the tough and big,

Up comes the tender sprig.

When people are alive, they are soft; when dead, they are hard.

When every living thing is alive, it is soft; when dead, it is hard.

So, the strong and hard have no vitality; the soft and weak have vitality.

Therefore, when an army is too strong and rigid, it will be extinguished;

when a tree is too stiff, it will break.

The strong and hard are inferior; the weak and soft are superior.

Human beings are soft and supple at birth,

But stiff and hard at death.

All things in Nature are soft and pliant when alive,

But dry and withered when dead.

Thus, the stiff and hard is the companion of death,

And the soft and supple is the companion of life.

Therefore, an army that is unyielding will soon perish,

And a tree that is unbending will soon break.

The hard and unyielding is an inferior quality;

The soft and yielding is a superior quality.

Life is soft and weak, death is hard and strong.

Plants are soft or fragile while living

And wither and harden while dying.

Therefore death grows in strength and hardness,

And life grows in softness and weakness.

A strong army perishes and a strong tree breaks.

What is hard and strong should not be valued,

And "the Above" should keep soft and weak.

At birth a person is soft and supple; at their deaths they are firm and strong.

All creatures, plants and trees are born tender and flexible,

when they are dead they become brittle and dried.

Thus it is that people who are stiff and hard are companions of death.

The soft and yielding are the followers of life.

It can be seen that a great inflexible army will fall under it's own weight,

just as a stiff unyielding tree will break in the wind.

Dwelling in an inflexible unyielding manner will bring downfall.

The pliant and supple will survive.

